Jesus, The Compassion of God
The Christian claim for Jesus goes beyond all that has been stated so far in this book. Christian faith proclaims that Jesus is divine. Contemporary problems with that statement do not concern its truth but its intelligibility, as explained in the introduction. The question for Christology today is how to express the relation of Jesus to the transcendent God in fidelity to the tradition and in a way that can make sense to the contemporary believer. This is really a task of showing how the divinity claim arises out of the believers' experience of salvation in Jesus Christ, and of expressing the claim in imagery and analogies that speak to the contemporary sense of reality. The first part of this has been attempted in the three foregoing chapters. The second part will be attempted in this chapter.
The Christology of the New Testament has a remarkable plurality, so much so that one ought perhaps to speak of Christologies in the plural.' Within the New Testament itself there is no apparent attempt to reconcile and combine them into a single perspective. Various models or analogies are used to relate Jesus to the transcendent God. There is the mode of address as kyrios, Lord. There are the Johannine images that recall the creation story of Genesis 1, namely Word of God, spoken into the world, and Light of God shining into the world (later found in the creedal formulation, "light from light"), as well as Truth and Life. Also obviously echoing the imagery of Genesis 1, but with particular reference to the creation of human persons, is the language of the Pauline tradition. Probably quoting an earlier hymn using Hebrew expressions of divine wisdom, Colossians 1:15-20 presents Jesus as the visible image of the invisible God, the pattern of creation, the one in whom the divine came to dwell.
Besides the images that refer to the creation stories of Genesis, there are images with reference rather specifically to Jesus as the "power and wisdom of God" (I Corinthians 1:24), and even the implied representation of Jesus as the true Law of God which seems to be pervasive in Pauline thought. Further there are scattered images of Jesus, such as the Way to the Father, life-giving Spirit, and so forth, besides many others not of immediate interest here, because their function is to relate Jesus to human history and destiny rather than directly to the transcendent God.
All of these images relating Jesus to the transcendent
God-Word, Light, Truth, Life, Image, Pattern, Dwelling,
Power, Wisdom, Law, Way, Spirit-are impersonal. They are
all, so to speak, verbs in disguise. They represent the "activity"
of God, and express an outreach of God to or into creation. In
themselves they do not address the question of a preexistence,' though they certainly lend themselves to that understanding concerning Jesus. They offer the possibility of envisaging pre-existence in terms that are at once personal and non-restrictive. They are personal because they express activities that imply personal relationships, personal participation. They are non-restrictive because they do not require the imagination to project into eternity some kind of reflection of a human person, which must then be qualified with all kinds of negations-no bodiliness, no temporality, and so forth.
The New Testament attribution of divinity to Jesus appears in the first place to have been linked with the Resurrection, later with the baptism in the Jordan by John, later yet with the conception and birth, and finally in John's Gospel with the pre-existence of Jesus. The New Testament does not seem to require that the "divinization" of Jesus or, as we should say, the Incarnation, can only be seen as a moment at the inception of life, a moment preceding any human response and therefore totally independent of it. Rather it seems to allow for the paradox which names those four different momentsResurrection, Baptism, birth, and pre-existent eternity-precisely because the mystery of the Incarnation can be approached from different viewpoints.
There is, however, in the flew Testament another image which subsequent tradition seems to have developed most. It is the image of the Son of God, an image which in its Biblical setting does not necessarily involve a divinity claim. It is easy to know why this image should come to dominate the scene. The so-called "Abba-experience" of Jesusr is so pervasive in all the testimonies about him that, in the context of his intimacy with God as Father, nothing could be more natural than to think of Jesus primarily as the Son of God. The Prologue to John's Gospel does this, when it states that God's Word, which was with God in the beginning, which was what God was, the Word by which God created, (so far using the image of the Word simply for the activity of God), became human, dwelling among us so that we saw in him a glory befitting the Father's only Son (using the personal image of the Son as subsequent to the Incarnation).
Even in John's Gospel, the imagination of the devout reader is not really required to project into eternity a personal pre-existence of the Son beside the Father. There is an easy ambiguity here that is very much in keeping with traditional Jewish ways of having Wisdom and Torah somehow dwelling and conversing with God in God's own transcendent realm outside of human history. This, of course, is what might be
expected in view of the Hebrew emphasis on the unity of God, which would hardly allow the devout imagination to place a person there but could tolerate the literary personification of God's attributes.
Subsequent Christian reflection, while taking the impersonal imagery as metaphorical, seems to have taken the image of the Son more literally, and therefore more restrictively, than was intended, and seems to have taken it for granted that the text of Scripture itself compelled us to this. Indeed, even when the discussions of the fourth and fifth centuries centered upon the role of the Logos in relation to the transcendent God and in relation to Jesus, there is often a hint that it is not the image of God's utterance but the image of God's Son that is being projected into eternity.'
It seems to be the unspoken assumption that this image is not as strictly metaphorical as the others, which causes the trouble of intelligibility to many contemporary believers. Aware that to speak of God as person is metaphor or analogy taken from the observation of human individuals, and aware that to speak of Three Persons in God is therefore a densely compounded metaphor, believers naturally want to ask what kind of statement is being made when we represent Jesus as personally pre-existent. If we are taking "person" literally, then we mean human person. But in that case we cannot speak of pre-existence because the claim does not concern the humanity of Jesus but the divinity. But if we speak of the pre-existence of Jesus as divine Person, then we are not speaking of the literal meaning of the word "person," but of the analogy by which we can refer to God in personal terms, compounded by the highly specialized, technical sense of the term "divine Person" as used in trinitarian discourse. In other words, in this case we are not really speaking of personal pre-existence in any sense which imagination or common sense would recognize as personal. To the theologian this may be subtlety. To the devout layperson of lively intelligence and inquiring turn of mind, it is frustration and confusion and does not tend to further prayer or Christian living.
The question will, of course, arise whether this discussion is academic and somewhat impertinent in both senses of the word, in the context of the definition and legacy of Chalcedon. Therefore, it is important to consider carefully the parameters which Chalcedon imposes on further discussion of Christology.` The declared intent of the fathers of Chalcedon was to exhort and encourage all Christians to join together in peace and harmony among themselves in their confession of faith in Christ. Such a confession, they declared, must be true to the sources of our tradition as we have them in the scriptures, the formulae of public worship (that is the liturgy), the standard catechesis of the churches, and the explicit teaching of the church fathers gathered in previous great councils. The Tome of Leo, which is included specifically in the defined teaching of Chalcedon, gathers up a great range of the traditional imagery and language, tolerant of a considerable variety of approaches as long as they can be reconciled with the language and imagery of Scripture and worship.
This reconciliation with the traditional language and image
ry, as Chalcedon was concerned to demand it, seems to have as its most basic purpose to preserve the paradox of our Christology in such a way that Jesus can be worshipped without idolatry and imitated in truth, not in a kind of pious fiction. Expressed more abstractly, Chalcedon was concerned to guarantee the true humanity of Jesus against monophysite interpretations, which envisaged the humanity as simply disappearing or dissolving into the divinity at the Incarnation. Yet Chalcedon also wanted to be faithful to Christian piety as already officially expressed at Nicea, Constantinople and Ephesus-a tradition which had doggedly maintained the true divinity of Jesus, even while it was manifestly incapable of giving a coherent rational explanation of what was meant by the claim,
The reason for the Christian clinging to this paradoxical statement of the one Jesus who is truly human as we are as well as being truly divine as the transcendent Father and Creator is, seems to be based quite solidly in a critical reflection on Christian praxis. On the one hand the radical transformation of human possibilities, as experienced in the community of Christians, can only be the re-creating, redeeming power of the divine, and Christians have no shadow of doubt that this power comes out from the Risen Jesus. On the other hand, the Jesus in whom they place their unconditional trust, and in whom they encounter the divine face to face, is the Jesus of history, a man like other men, historically and socially situated in a world of sin and struggle, one who lived his life in the same human situation as other human persons, and with whom there can be genuine solidarity.
There seems to be a central soteriological concern in this. If a God in disguise did what Jesus did and "suffered" what Iesus suffered, this could but be a charade, and it would be difficult to see in what way the human situation would really have changed in consequence of his "life and "death." Yet there is also a concern to establish that the break-through that has occurred in Jesus for the whole human community is more than a great act of human valor and generosity. Such acts have occurred before and will occur again, but they do not have the character of definitively changing the possibilities of the human situation. Only the breakthrough of the divine redeeming power could radically change the human situation within a sinful world and history. Only the breakthrough of the divine compassion within human freedom could really do that. Such, in a modern restatement, seems to be the soteriological concern of Chalcedon.
There is, of course, also a strictly theological concern in the task of Chalcedon, that is the task of guaranteeing the humanit}' of Jesus within an accepted tradition of his divinity. That concern is to avoid simply identifying Jesus with God, the Creator and the transcendent, with all that would imply of the loss of transcendence and the restriction of the being of God. Moreover, this concern is practical for Christian tradition inasmuch as the New Testament and the formulae of Christian prayer define Jesus precisely by his relationship to the Father. Yet, if Jesus is not simply to be identified as God, he is at the same time not to be put beside the Fatheras anothergod (for the Christian community has always said on the basis of its own praxis that the monotheism of Israel is the truth of the divine) and not to be considered as an intermediate being between the strictly divine and the properly human (as established at Nicea).
Beyond the soteriofogical and theological concerns, there is the even more important, strictly practical concern of Christian spirituality. Christian spirituality is based on the assumption that to place ultimate trust in Jesus and the following of his Way is not wrong or misleading, and that to make an unconditional surrender of one's life and being to Jesus is not idolatrous. At the center of the Christian understanding of revelation and redemption stands the person of Jesus. Of him we sav that he not only brings us the revelation of God, hut that in his person he is the revelation of God. This is a eery broad claim, for it means that the ultimate touchstone of truth in the human encounter with God is not any formulation in words but a person, and that in case of perplexity in new situations and confronted with new questions, one's access to discernment is not rational extrapolation from a previous statement but attentive presence to, and imitation of, a person.
This last concern is evidently the foundation and reason of the other two. What is truly important in the language of Christology is that it be faithful to the service of Christian life, prayer and action in the world, making it possible to discern what is truly redemptive in a changing historical situation. There seems to be nothing in the purpose or in the verbal formulation of Chalcedon (with its plurality of canonized former expressions) that requires us to take a language of personal pre-existence as immediately appropriate to the reality rather than as part of a multi-faceted, highly paradoxical presentation of a mystery that cannot be neatly captured in rational explanations.
Although it seems to have been so understood by post. Chalcedonian discussion, there does not seem to be any good reason for concluding that Chalcedon itself intended to imply that the "one person" on which it insists is to be understood as a pre-existent divine person, thus locating the reality of Jesus very firmly outside the human. In the first place, it cannot be understood in this way because Chalcedon is using the term "person" in a highly specialized sense, that is, to capture the unknown content that identifies the divine and the human in Jesus. We, on the other hand, use the word "person" to designate any individual of the human species, with particular emphasis on those qualities of the human species that are involved in a reflective self-awareness that is the basis for memory and for spontaneity. Moreover, Chalcedon, concerned as it was, to deny the monophysite position, quite certainly did not intend to deny Jesus full humanity including that human self-awareness which grounds human memory and human spontaneity. As a matter of historical fact, the further councils of antiquity continued the project of Chalcedon by insisting on a human will, human spontaneity and so
forth.,
It would seem, therefore, that in the light of all the foregoing considerations, fidelity to Chalcedon in our contemporary situation is observed in two ways. There is the concern to maintain for Christian understanding the dynamic tension between the language and imagery of Bible, worship and traditional teaching on the one hand and the language and imagery of the contemporary perception of reality on the
other hand. There is also the concern to maintain for Christian
spirituality the dynamic tension between the worship and
unconditional trust of Jesus Christ as the place of encounter with the divine in history on the one hand, and the wholehearted commitment to the following of Christ and solidarity with him in the redemptive transformation of the whole human experience on the other hand. Fidelity to the testimonies of the New Testament would seem to require something more, namely to keep alive that ambiguity that allows a dynamic tension between the personal and impersonal in the imaging of the relation of Jesus to the transcendent God.
There can be no question, of course, of displacing the biblical images around which Christian faith has been built for so many centuries and in so many cultures and languages, expressing itself in the visual arts as well as in literature of many kinds. These images provide the thread of continuity and therefore provide a crucial means of access to the sources of our faith in the historical Christ event and the testimony of the first followers of Jesus who knew him in the flesh. That is a heritage no Christian would wish to relinquish. Fu?ther, there can be no question of setting aside Chalcedon, noranything of the legacy of doctrinal definitions formally proposed to the church, for these are the outcome of a discernment process in the community of believers which makes us heirs to the cumulative Christian praxis and reflection on praxis of the Christian centuries. There can only be question of extending the process and of freeing the Christian imagination for a more living and integrated appropriation of the heritage of faith that is handed on.
The New Testament imagery is in itself powerful and flexible although subsequent usage has sometimes given it an alien rigidity. Jesus as the Word of God spoken in eternity and
spoken now into history, is personal in the sense that it is God
speaking, not in the sense that a person is envisaged in eternity
in addition to God. Moreover, it allows easy passage of the
imagination from the creative speaking of God in Genesis to
the redemptive, recreative speaking of God in the Christ event, while resonating with memories of the Word of God as spoken by the prophets. It allows for both continuity and
uniqueness in the understanding of the person and mission of Jesus, inasmuch as we are all called to be words of God to one another and to our societies and inasmuch as there have always been outstanding persons in history who have surely been words of God in a special way, while the claim is made on the other hand that Jesus is wholly identified with the divine Word or self-utterance of God. Beyond this, it allows for a helpful ambiguity in the identification, making it possible at one and the same time for Jesus to become divine as he becomes human (in the whole extent of his life from conception to Resurrection) and yet to have been the divine Word from the beginning. Once we remove the restrictions subsequently superimposed on the image of the Word, whereby the personal identity and continuity of consciousness of the human Jesus is understood to pre-exist in eternity, the paradox of becoming what he was from the beginning, namely the Word of God, is quite tolerable to the imagination because we have many analogies for it. For instance, we become what we were from the beginning, namely human.
Something similar may be said of the image of the Light and of the various other New Testament images that speak of the meaning and identity of Jesus and of his relationship to the Father. With more subtle nuances, something similar may be
said of the image of the Son. Yet in all of these instances, there has been a certain freezing of the images and a chilling paralysis of the imagination as it comes in contact with them. That is why it seems urgent to suggest some further representations that arise clearly out of the contemporary Christian praxis and a critical reflection upon it.
Perhaps the representation that suggests itself most persuasively in our times is that of Jesus as the incarnate Compassion of God. Compassion is a broad term and a broad concept whose connotations and further possibilities keep reverberating. We commonly use it as synonymous with pity and it certainly means that but also more than that. It implies a movement towards the other to help, but also a movement into the experience of the other to be present in solidarity and communion of experience. It implies sensitivity, vulnerability to be affected by the experience of the other but it also implies remedial action against suffering and oppression. Most of all, it implies involvement in the situation."
To speak of Jesus as the Compassion of God is to reflect on contemporary Christian praxis and on the realization that the following of Jesus in our times confronts us constantly with human suffering on a massive scale, caused by structures of society which are the solidified deposits of the consequences of evil deeds in the world. As we face these massive problems of humanly produced human suffering, there is always a sense of our own powerlessness and insignificance. Yet there is also the experience that where social sin abounds, there also "social grace" abounds even more, As Christians we do experience the rebirth of hope and courage and we do witness in our own times in places of greatest oppression and deprivation the inexplicable transforming power of basic Christian communities. We realize that the power and presence of this transformation is that of the living Risen Christ and that its quality is compassion in all the dimensions mentioned above. Then we realize that we must name Jesus Compassion, but a Compassion which in its range and power and discernment is divine.
In the contemporary Christian reflection on Christian praxis there is an ever-threatening possibility of a deep schism of affections and loyalties between those who see the liberation of the oppressed in concrete historical dimensions as central to the redemption and those who see the conflictual quality of liberation movements as contrary to the redemption which they envisage as primarily a matter of communion with and surrender to God in individual lives. The representation of Jesus as the Compassion of God seems to offer a mediation between these two perceptions of what is at stake in our practical response to the redemption, for compassion is essentially non-violent, tending to communion and community, and yet is also essentially active, tending to redress injuries and injustices.
In terms of the classic formulations of Christology, to name Jesus the Compassion of God is to preserve that balance between the personal and the impersonal that make the imaging of the incarnation possible. The Compassion of God,
like the Word and the Life and the Light, refers to "activity" in God. That is to say it enables us to imagine the one God in dynamic ways. Moreover, it pictures God in "activity" that relates God to the creation and to creatures as well as to the redemption of the human race and its history. It identifies Jesus with that outreach into creation which makes God present in it, participant in it, entering into the human experience in solidarity with human suffering, history and destiny. It is a way of saying that in the person of Jesus, God truly enters into creation, into the human dilemma in all its tragic dimensions. And all of these implications seem to be facets of the traditional Christology.
Finally, to speak of Jesus as the Compassion of God allows for human initiative in Jesus in every phase of a redemptive incarnation without any denial of the divine initiative. It allows for the progressive human identification with the redemptive initiative of God so that the human Jesus becomes wholly one with the divine compassion and therefore becomes truly divine without contradiction either of the unity and transcendence of God or of the authentic humanity of Jesus.








'(( Jamrs DG. Dunq Chdeiologv in rM Ma4inq (Philadelphu: Westminsmr, 19g0), p- bw ezpecially Cond.-," pp. 75L76B
~iF~d It mav be objmed that the r.	ce. m the preun ch,prer JAI,-td, om
Philippians 2:6I L For argu mem that erhi, P- h- sexr 6ears relerence to Adam creareJ in the dicinr image, and ~here{e is - an assertion of perwnal p,,-o-, In a d,,,
-- , sxe DunR eD n4 pp- 114-121.
•Cf )-him Jeremias, op. 'ii.
'CJ Dunn oD of pp- 139-150. Dunn e,idendy considers the whole history d Ch,-)N, as a srruggle m come m mrms wlrh )ohn's Gospel, yer he .Ii, does nor explain ar y Mm of his kngrhy diuussion »hy he sees rhe imagery of John as -c-.1v Implying pt-1 pre-ezisrence. Dunni method seems w ykld the same -,k »irh Johris images as wirh thor ol the synopria.
IF,, a full accoum of rhe process o( rhi, Chrssologmal acmuers gi,ing exsensioe pnmansources, se< Richud A. Noms. ikCbdsrohgicalCannoorrsy (Phi 6delphu: Fonress. 1 9du).

