
The AODA New Candidate Guide



The AODA New Candidate Guide

First Edition, 2016


Copyright 2016 by Telluric Press, Indiana, Pennsylvania.
(www.telluricpress.com)

All rights reserved. Private Material. No part of this book may be reproduced, 
shared, quoted,
distributed, sold,or in any manner disseminated whatsoever.

ISBN-13: ????????????????????

ISBN-10: ????????????????????????

Colophon

Cover art by Dana O’Driscoll

Designed by Paul Angelini using Adobe® InDesign.®


The Ancient Order of Druids in America

New Candidate Guide

Version 1, 20161

Restricted to Members of the AODA2.

1     Guide Prepared by Members of the AODA Grand Grove. Most of this guide was 
written by
Dana O’Driscoll (Archdruid of Water). Additional contributions by Adam 
Robersmith (Archdruid
of Fire), John Michael Greer (Grand Archdruid Emeritus), Gordon Cooper (Grand 
Archdruid),
and other members of the Order as noted. Special thanks to Kelly Trumble, Grand 
Almoner, for
copyediting, and Paul Angelini, Grand Pendragon, for the layout out this guide.

2     This New Candidate Guide is the Esoteric Property of the Ancient Order of 
Druids of Amer-

ica (AODA). It is issued with an understanding and agreement that it is to be 
surrendered to the
AODA in the event that you cease membership for any reason.


Table of Contents

Welcome to the AODA!                                                            
                             1

Chapter 1: Finding Your Druid Path                                              
                   3

What Does It Mean to be a Druid?.                                               
  3

Wildcrafting Your Own Druidry                                                   
   4

Personal Cosmologies.                                                           
6

Tools for Aspiring Druid-Poets.                                             8

Creating a local Druidic Cosmology                                       9

Velociraptrix’s Resource List.                                                
11

Chapter 2: About the AODA                                                       
                     12

Key AODA Groups and Information.                                            12

AODA Designations                                                               
      12

The Grand Grove.                                                                
         14

AODA’s Groves and Groups                                                        
   14

Ordination and the Gnostic Celtic Church.                                    15

A Brief History of the AODA.                                                    
   15

Trilithon                                                                       
                   16

Chapter 3: The AODA First Degree Curriculum                                     
     17

The Earth Path.                                                                 
            17

The Sun Path                                                                    
            18


The Moon Path                                                                   
         19

Ovate, Bardic, or Druid Exploration.                                            
 19

Your Druid Notebook.                                                            
     20

Chapter 4: The Earth Path: Tree Planting, Nature Awareness, and
Lifestyle Changes                                                               
                                   21

Lifestyle Changes: The Metaphor of the Mountain.                         21

Tree Planting.                                                                  
              21

Finding Nine Books on Nature.                                                   
  22

Chapter 5: The Sun Path: AODA Symbolism, Core Concepts, and
Rituals                                                                         
                                           24

The Sun Path Symbolism.                                                         
     24

Awen.                                                                           
      24

Directions, Colors, and Animals of the AODA.                    25

The Three Currents.                                                             
25

The Three Druid Elements.                                                  27

AODA’s Seasonal Celebrations and Holy Days.                              28

The Druid Altar                                                                 
           29

Druid Ritual.                                                                   
             30

Chapter 6: The Moon Path: Meditation and Reflection.                           
31

A Druid Meditation Primer                                                       
    31

Recommended Reading                                                       34

On Keeping Your Druid Notebook.                                               
34

Chapter 7: Learning the Sphere of Protection                                    
          37


Brief Overview of the SOP                                                       
      38

The SOP as a Template.                                                          
       39

Learning the Sphere of Protection.                                              
   39

Two Ways to Learn the SOP                                                40

Using this Guide.                                                               
 40

The Sphere of Protection Step by Step                                42

Adapting the SOP                                                                
         64

Chapter 8: Bardic, Ovate, and Druid Studies                                     
           65

Appendices                                                                      
                                      69

Appendix A: Sphere of Protection: One Full Ritual.                        69

Preparation.                                                                    
    69

The Elemental Cross.                                                           
69

The Circulation of Light.                                                     
71

The Calling of the Elements.                                                71

Air                                                                             
        71

Fire.                                                                           
        72

Water                                                                           
      73

Earth.                                                                          
       74

Spirit Below                                                                    
    69

Spirit Above                                                                    
    70

Spirit Within.                                                                  
   70

Appendix B: Solitary Grove Opening and Closing                         78


Declaring Peace.                                                                
 78

Purifying the Grove with the Elements.                                79

Invoking the Holy Powers.                                                   81

Solitary Grove Closing                                                         
82

Releasing the Elements.                                                       
82

Returning Power to the Land                                               83

Invoking the Sword of Swords                                             83

Appendix C: Seasonal Ceremonies.                                                
85

Spring Equinox Ceremony (Solitary).                                            
86

Meditation.                                                                     
   89

Additional Work.                                                                
89

Summer Solstice Ceremony (Solitary).                                           
90

Meditation.                                                                     
   93

Additional Work.                                                                
93

Autumn Equinox Ceremony (Solitary).                                         94

Meditation.                                                                     
   96

Additional Work.                                                                
96

Winter Solstice Ceremony (Solitary).                                            
 97

Meditation                                                                      
  100

Additional Work                                                               
100

Appendix D: Tree Planting Ritual (Solo/Group).                           101

Ritual Supplies.                                                                
 101


Ritual Preparation.                                                            
102

The Ritual.                                                                     
  102


Welcome to the AODA!

Bright blessings and welcome to the Ancient Order of Druids in America!
We welcome you on the nature path in friendship. You are now a lifetime member 
of
the AODA, and we encourage you to take your next steps on the journey as a 
Druid.
This guide helps acquaint you with the AODA and what we offer, and introduces 
you
to the core practices of the study program for your Candidate year. With each 
degree
you complete, you will receive a set of core lessons as well as “short courses” 
on vari-
ous topics (which are under development in 2017 and beyond). The core lessons 
will
complement and aid in your work through your first, second, and third degrees 
and
draw        on the fundamental practices of the AODA. Additionally, we have a 
number of
groves, study groups, and home circles as well as a vibrant online community 
where
you can connect with others on the druid path.

In keeping with the traditions of Revival Druidry, the AODA encourages its
members to pursue their own spiritual directions within a broad common 
framework,
and its approach to spirituality is personal and experiential rather than 
dogmatic. The
initiation rituals and study program are prescribed, in that we offer a set of 
practices;
however, beliefs are individualistic and diverse among our membership. In 
addition,
AODA members are expected to keep four traditional Druid holy days, the 
solstices
and equinoxes. Creativity and the quest for personal Awen—the inner light of 
inspi-
ration—are among the AODA’s central values.

AODA welcomes adults of all national origins, cultural and linguistic back-
grounds, and affiliations with other Druidic and spiritual traditions. 
Ecological awareness
and commitment to an Earth-honoring lifestyle, celebration of the cycles of 
nature
through seasonal ritual, and personal development through meditation and other 
spir-
itual exercises form the core of our work, and involvement in the arts, healing 
practices,
and traditional esoteric studies are among its applications and expressions. 
This guide
was designed to help start (or continue) your path of druidry.

Chapter 1 offers insights on finding your own druid path and wildcrafting your
own druidry. Chapter 2 offers information on the structure of the AODA.  
Chapter 3


is a complete listing of our candidate curriculum in its current form. Chapter 
4 provides
suggestions for the Earth Path, Chapter 5 on the sun path, and Chapter 6 on the 
moon
path. Chapter 7 offers full instructions for the Sphere of Protection.

Chapter 8 offers insights on Druid, Ovate, and Bardic studies. Finally, a 
variety
of appendices offer rituals, examples, and more.

The primary textbooks for AODA’s study for the Candidate year are John
Michael Greer’s The Druidry Handbook and this guide. We recommend reading this
guide first, and then reading the Druidry Handbook. Please note that the 
curriculum
published in the Druidry Handbook is outdated, so use the curriculum in this 
guide
and/or on the AODA’s website instead. The rest of The Druidry Handbook, however,
provides key information on AODA’s practices and history and is a delightful 
intro-
duction to this path!

Yours under the hazels,

The AODA Grand Grove


Chapter 1: Finding Your Druid Path

What does it mean to be a druid?

The AODA is a teaching order. That is, we do not tell you what to believe, how
to believe it, or insist we have answers to life’s greatest mysteries. Instead, 
we offer a
core set of practices that will help you come to your own understandings, 
explore your
creative gifts, learn more deeply about the natural world around you, connect 
more
deeply to nature, and begin to tread more lightly upon the earth. Here are some 
of the
different ways that our own AODA members express their understanding of 
druidry:

White Feather, Druid Apprentice: “For me Druidry is the experiential study of
where we inherently belong within the Cosmic biosphere. Then, through continued
practice, reshaping our lives to be in harmony with Nature’s cycles. I believe 
this is
the path by which we connect to Nwyfre and that all druid wisdom and magic begin
with this knowledge.”

Brenda Jenkins Kleager, Sapphire Storm: Druid Apprentice:
“Druidry is a way of life that falls naturally into my daily activities.
Druidry keeps me in tune to the cycles of nature.

Druidry celebrates the interconnectedness of all things.
Druidry means constantly learning and seeking answers.”

Allison Jones-Lo, Druid Candidate: “For me, Druidry is a life-long journey
to connecting with nature, being a part of the world (all aspects of it) that 
has
never been open to me before. My Druid Path has filled me with a spiritual-
ity that I never achieved with organized religion. My connection with nature has
given me purpose that is evident in every aspect of my life and very 
fulfilling.”

Daniel Cureton, Druid Apprentice: “Druidry means being connected to the Living
Earth, being in tune with the currents of the Universe, and acting as a priest 
of


Nature. Cycles of the Moon, the path of the Sun, walking the shores of the sea, 
the
trails of the mountains, the sands of the desert, and the forest of the Earth, 
druidry
connects people to the land and sky, from what was once a disenchanted world, 
to a
reenchanted way of living that hails from our ancestors.”

Dana O’Driscoll, Archdruid of Water and Druid Adept: “To me, druidry is
about reconnection and regeneration. It is about connecting deeply with nature 
and
helping her heal, in walking through the winding paths in the forest with wisdom
and joy. My druidry focuses on connecting inner understandings through medita-
tion and ritual with the outer practices of permaculture design, homesteading, 
wild
tending, and herbalism. I embrace the bardic arts through music, writing, and 
the
visual arts and nature is my inspiration and collaborator. I am an ally to the 
land
and her spirits. Each day, and each moment, I walk as a druid, and I work to 
teach
others who are willing to learn.”

Sometimes, people think if they commit to the path of druidry, it means they
can’t be something else or identify with any other spiritual or religious path. 
While we
encourage you to dedicate yourself to your druid studies for a period of time, 
you are
absolutely welcome to combine druidry with other spiritual, esoteric, or life 
practices.
The key is that it is your druid path, and only you can determine its shape, 
course, and
trajectory. To help you better understand this, Grand Archdruid Gordon Cooper 
offers
his insights on “Wildcrafting” your own druidry.

Wildcrafting Your Own Druidry

By Gordon Cooper, Grand Archdruid

I have come by the green and winding road That leads from the town to the gods’
abode,- To the ancient shadowy place apart, Where spring is born in the 
woodland’s
heart, And over and over the ages through The spirit of joy is made anew. O 
world of
glory and toil and gleam, Made out of passion and dust and dream! On the 
gladsome
quest by my student vow, I am come to this threshold of beauty now, Where 
Nature sits
with inscrutable eyes Guarding her temple of mysteries. Who knows but the 
magical
master key, As Plotinus taught, may be ecstasy, And led by the sheer elation of 
love
And the intuitions we cannot prove,- We may pass in a moment fleet and fine 
Into the
realm of the divine! In such a grove when the world was young Great hymns to the
god of the wood were sung. And worshippers in procession came With garlands and


pipes to praise his name, Before ever the world grew sad and cold, When beauty 
its
eloquent story told In movement and rhythm and color and line, Where sense could
interpret and heart divine The hidden purpose, the ceaseless power, Enhancing 
the
fair world hour by hour. Is it so idle to believe That unfearing rapture may 
perceive,
Where the wonder rests on river and tree, The form and features of deity? To the
doubt-free soul even now and here What radiant presence might appear, Living and
warm, in the very guise It wore in the glad young centuries! This old gray 
stone might
almost be The altar of some divinity. Behold, I come with gifts in hand, As 
ancient
usages demand, And wreathe the stone and lift the prayer That shall the 
suppliant’s
faith declare. O Spirits of Earth, will ye not draw near, If the gift be clean 
and the
heart sincere? Come forth in loveliness and power And touch with glory the 
present
hour!  - From --”Earth Deities, a Masque” by Bliss Carman

Welcome to this essay on Druid Crafts, which celebrates the traditional skills
that are connected to the Druids in song, story, and reports from the classical 
authors.
What is druidry? Is it a description of a druid from the writings of a single 
Greek or
Roman author? Is it a recreation of religious practices (that may have never 
existed)
following careful analysis of the tales, written down or created hundreds of 
years after
the introduction of Christianity to Ireland? Is it the revivalist druidry of 
the middle ages,
the antiquarians, the poets of the Eisteddfod, or is it limited to the modern 
descendants
of the antiquarians, the Revivalist EuroPagan Druids? Is druidry merely the sum 
of
the local folk customs and practices of Ireland, Scotland and Wales that relate 
to wind,
wood and waters? Is it valid to call oneself a druid and ignore all of the 
traditions and
ideas about druidry? Any answer to this question must be a personal one, based 
on
the truths that an individual can apprehend and bring to fruition within the 
world.

That said, there are some ideas that run through most of these conceptions of
druidry. Firstly, there is the notion that druids had something important to 
say about
the natural world, could converse with it, and find its secrets by their arts. 
Secondly, that
their grammary (poetry, geometry and the entire body of lore held by classical 
druids),
both dark and fair, could change the world by calling forth the sacred fires of 
truth
and creation. For the past three hundred years this has been the conception of 
druids
most discussed and accepted in the west, while scholarship vacillates each 
decade over
what can and cannot be known about pre-historic druidry. Taken on its own terms,
druidry requires a visceral and studied participation in the world. It is not 
to be found
on the Internet - on websites, in chat rooms or on e-mail lists. In net 
arguments, the


endless recycling of half understood information, and the futile redaction of 
nature
that is so distant from trees, mushrooms, sea, shore and sky can only convey a 
vague
and distorted simulacrum of the truth of a sacred spring nourishing a thorn 
tree, let
alone the rest of the greening fire of the world.

This article is a finger pointing at the forest, and not the forest itself. 
Druidry
must be discovered and realized in tree planting parties, outdoor camps with 
other
druids, songs in the forests or in the high, windy places of rock and lonely 
desert, within
the speech of birds that gather at dusk, the beginning of the druidic “day”, 
and in the
assembly of seer-singers around a fire at night. The above should not be 
construed
as      an argument in favour of a druidry that is anti-intellectual. Far from 
it, druidry
depends on a keen awareness of Traditions, Song, Consciousness and Nature in 
all of
its manifestations, beginning and remaining rooted in the place that the 
student lives,
breathes and meditates. It does a potential druid no good to memorize endless 
and
speculative lists of Ogham “trees” while ignoring the cactus or mountains in 
their own
neighbourhood. Every land is sacred and has its own stories to tell. Not only 
in Ireland
and           Wales can the imbas, awen or grail be found, but in the whole of 
the greening and
browning earth. It whispers in canyons in Colorado, teases one in the waving 
grains of
the prairie, flashes in the evening light of the savannah and dances in 
tornados made
by the gods of weather. Pounding waves have more to teach a druid than the glow
of a thousand computer screens. Living with Nature, tracing and appreciating the
sacred geometry of leaves unfolding in fractal patterns and weathered rocks, 
singing
with a murder of crows at dusk is part of druidic practice, as is an 
appreciation of the
land-naming tales of all places, not merely Ireland or Scotland.

Personal Cosmologies

The creation and realization of a personal cosmology is an element critical for
the aspiring druid. For those in misty coastal and forested regions, the 
sea/earth/sky
triad may be the most appropriate. For those living in the mountains of the 
desert, it
may be more useful to adapt features from the Grail stories that involve the 
quest for
Sarras, the sacred city in the desert, combined with astronomical alignments, 
should
any exist. While it is possible to work within a cosmology and space that is 
discon-
nected from one’s environment, there is something profoundly unreal about 
trying to
describe features or seasons that one doesn’t experience. The Pagan “Eightfold 
Wheel
of    the Year”, developed by Ross Nichols and Gerald Gardner, works well in 
Northern
climes that have four seasons. The eight fold pattern is of little or no value 
in tropical,


Mediterranean or desert climates. The best advice for many would-be druids is 
to throw
out all references apart from the Farmer’s Almanac (or a copy of Sky and 
Telescope),
get a thermometer and barometric pressure gauge, buy an astrolabe, a basic 
drafting
set with compass, graph paper and protractor, maps and a good compass, a box of 
96
crayons and art pads to record the changing plants and seasons in sketches, and 
to try
sleeping under the open sky for as many nights as possible.

A meditative musical instrument, such as the harp, zither or dulcimer may also
serve the aspiring druid as a means of expression. Astronomical phenomena, such 
as
meteor showers, can be used as ritual markers, and easily work into certain 
elements
of  the druid’s personal cosmology, though this may require some flexibility 
and close
observation. (There are hints that some traditional tales in the Irish 
materials may
preserve cosmological features, and “Hamlet’s Mill” is the classic work that 
covers this
topic.) While in the earliest stages of their work, reference books on Ogham or 
similar
topics may be of value, experience and meditation will ultimately prove to be 
the best
guide to a cosmology. A cosmology is a framework against which the Greater and
Lesser mysteries can be appreciated within the local expression of Sovereignty 
that the
druid lives in, although these Mysteries can never be fully explained. 
Cosmologies are
a way to make the Sacred more obvious within life as it is lived. Years of 
meditation,
music and dreams may be needed in order to establish a mythic geography, a 
backdrop
against which one’s life can be more fully appreciated and explored.

This Universe is organic, filled with irrational numbers and paradoxes, as is 
any
cosmology that usefully reflects it. While a laundry list may not have value in 
the quest
for the Grail or druidry, there are traditional artistic and ritual 
methodologies that are
appropriate to druidry. If one takes the view that polytheistic cosmologies 
need not
conflict, the world then becomes large enough to have many sacred centers, 
places where
Greater and Lesser mysteries dwell and bestow gifts on those who respectfully 
seek
them out and honour them. The concept of the sacred pilgrimage is one shared by 
most
cultures, where the seeker goes to a place of power in order to receive a 
blessing or insight.
There are rock faces near the sacred Duwammish river, near Seattle, where the 
world
was re-made and Spring was released into the world, Mount Meru is a cosmic axis 
for
many Asians, the lost caves of the White Spring of Glastonbury is where the 
secrets
of the Underworld live - these are three examples of places worthy of 
consideration for
the aspiring druid. Why should a potential druid care about anything beyond 
Ireland,
Scotland, Ireland, Wales, Brittany or England? Because many potential druids do 
not


live in these lands, nor are they necessarily related by recent ties of 
cultural heritage or
ancestry to the peoples of these lands. If druidry is based on universal 
principles and is
a philosophy of earth, stars and trees, then local features have immense power 
to shape
the grammary and body of the druid. It may even benefit druids living in the 
British
Isles to reexamine their own environments for clues towards making a better 
druidry.

Tools for Aspiring Druid-Poets

What better place to begin the druidic quest than with an appreciation of the
Songs of Creation? Most cultures have an extant epic or collection of stories 
around
the theme of sacred history, whether it is Genesis, the collection known as the 
Kalevala,
the Eddas, the Book of Invasions, the Songs of Firdosi, etc. Note that it isn’t 
always the
Universe that is being created: some stories seem to assume that the World 
pre-exists
the time of the Greater and Lesser Mysteries. These songs have many things in 
com-
mon--they are sung or chanted, not silently read in a printed book. Hebrew 
prophets
intoned the sacred words of power, druids used the Dark Speech, the poems of the
Kalevala were sung by two singer-musicians, and the Songs of Firdosi are 
chanted to
this day in Iran. The close connection to music should be considered as well, 
particu-
larly in light of the harp traditions of Scotland. Unlocking the word-hoards of 
poetry,
being led “from a word to a word” requires more than simple memorization of 
single
words or phrases. Oral poetry is constructed on themes that are expressed in 
phrases,
known as “The Formula”. An oral phrase would be of the form “whisperingly, in 
trance,
she spoke Thus to the drum of the Spirits...” (this example is from the “Book 
of the
Nisan Shamaness”, a traditional Manchu tale.) The filidh must be sufficiently 
skilled
to swiftly and succinctly choose and shape phrases for a briocht (blessing) or 
lorica
(breastplate) at a moment’s notice. As was true of the Japanese master 
storytellers,
endless and powerfully chanted repetition of an epic oral poem or story is the 
best
training here. The beginner develops an appreciation of the rhyme schemes, 
dynam-
ics and story elements in a fashion not possible in simple reading. As Alfred 
Lord,
author of “Singer of Tales” demonstrated some years ago, within oral poetry 
there is
no Ur-poem or song, no single true example of any story from which all other 
variants
spring. There is simply the poem being chanted at a particular moment, in front 
of
a specific audience. Length, order, story detail are all variables to be played 
with by
the ollamh, or ritual poetic specialist. The extant texts are a translation, a 
translation
from the spoken to written word. (Even if the monks in the monasteries invented 
the
stories, they were invented out of an Irish background, one that oddly enough 
corre-
sponds to the sacred iconography from the rest of Northern Europe.) As is the 
case


with all translations, something vitally important is lost in the process. Most 
of us are
working in English, rather than Manx, Cornish or Breton as a native language, 
and
have thereby lost the original meters and rhyme-schemes in the native tongue. 
Poetry,
like prose, cannot be translated but only re-interpreted into a foreign 
language. It is
to the benefit of every potential druid to spend some time struggling with the 
original
language, if only to appreciate its power and graces.

Having resolved to work in English (for the 97% of you reading this), it becomes
important to recognize the tools of spoken, rather than written English and its 
use
in    ritual story-telling. Fortunately, Dr. Seuss books are widely available. 
(If a druid
cannot tell children’s stories to their pet rock, nephew or cousin, how can 
they hope
to aspire to greater magics?) Initial training should consist of almost endless 
repeti-
tion, until these simple rhyme schemes become second nature. Moving past Dr. 
Seuss,
many traditional stories preserve ritual features--most stories have a clear 
beginning
and ending, with the initial piece of the story setting out a cosmology and 
world view.
There generally is a hero, a task of some sort, and a resolution before the 
dissolution
of the story-space by the teller. Astute modern story tellers have listeners 
hold a
rope during the telling, lower lighting, use props, voice features (volume, 
speed, pitch,
inflection, etc.) as devices to accentuate the power of the story. The most 
astute tellers
will adjust the story to the tolerance of the audience, altering descriptions, 
locale and
compressing or expanding the elements of the story as needed. For the advanced
druid,              a harpist, zither or dulcimer player accompanying the druid 
or story reciter can
create an authentic atmosphere for trance induction and story-telling in a 
traditional
Scottish and Irish context.

Creating a Local Druidic cosmology

As an example of how to create a local druidic cosmology, let’s take the case of
a would-be druid, a young lass with the magical name of Velociraptrix, who 
lives in
Fabens, Texas. She is a 25 year old female Mexican-American with a B.S. in 
nursing
from the University of Texas, and has taken a number of classes in astronomy and
anthropology for her minor. As a member of a Mexican pagan dance group, she has
a background in ritual and dance. The first step she takes in establishing her 
druidic
cosmology is to note that “El Paso del Norte” has been the mountain pass that 
traders
and travelers have used for thousands of years in transporting goods overland 
from
the old Mexican cultures to the Pueblo tribes. Her second piece of information 
is that
an important archaeological site is Hueco Tanks, where hundreds of rock 
paintings


of ancient spirits are depicted. These rock figures seem to be artistically 
linked to the
high civilizations of ancient Mexico and the Pueblos. And, the Rio Grande river 
runs
(meanders would be a more accurate description this era) through the region, 
forming
a natural barrier and the main source of water, aside from other minor streams 
and
some springs. She notes the incursion of non-native plants into the desert and 
decides
to donate time to a group that works to restore the Southwest desert to its 
natural
state. The book “Cultures of Habitat” by Nabhan provides her with relevant 
informa-
tion about desert plants and offers further clues for her cosmology. Living in 
a desert
environment with less than nine inches per year of rain and a shortage of most 
of the
Ogham trees (though there are forests in New Mexico a quick drive away), she 
decides
to build her focus around ritual waters. A quick trip to the USGS office 
provides her
with detailed maps of springs.

On a hunch, she calls David Eidelmann, a professor of archaeology at UTEP
to see if ritual travelers carried some emblem of their office. She was right, 
they car-
ried a ritual staff. Her next step is to try and map the route that the traders 
would
have used (parrot feathers went North to Hopi territory, turquoise went South to
Mexico.) She then checks with several folkloric experts (her aunts, a 
grandmother
and several older cousins) to see if there are any ritual restrictions on 
traveling, and
discovers a legend about a powerful spirit who cries at night, best avoided. As 
a
student of history, she is fully aware of the linkage between human sacrifice on
a  mass scale and some of the high cultures of Mexico. Just as a modern Celtic 
or
Roman pagan reconstructionist would eschew human sacrifice as a barbaric custom,
she resolves to stay away from spirits and places associated with human 
sacrifice
or bloodletting, while acknowledging the principle that symbolic sacrifice 
brings
light into the world, as is the case in many religions. Velociraptrix has 
established
that her cosmology is bounded by the Rio Grande, the Guadalupe mountains and
the historically used paths running roughly on a NE/SW line from the middle of
Mexico through the mountain pass and the Pueblos of New Mexico. Her focus is
on sacred waters, and their emergence from the desert. Given the ideal 
observation
conditions for astronomy, she decides to spend some time seeing if her 
relatives,
the  Pima Indians, have any star lore that might be useful to her. She makes a 
note
to take an extension course or two in ethnobotany and an advanced camp in desert
survival, which may come in handy once she begins walking the lands that are 
sacred
to   her. Other details will emerge as she meditates, walks, sings to the night 
sky and
sleeps on the mountains.


She will pull her lyrical inspiration from contemporary and classical Southwest-
ern and Mexican poetry, making it her own over time. As she’s bilingual in 
Spanish
and English, she will write chants in either language, depending on her mood, 
and has
enough of a ritual dance background to adopt some of the rhythms of the huehuetl
(the drum of the ancestors) to the group rituals she’s planning for her 
(eventual) Grove.
She decides to draw from some of the structural richness of the Hermetic 
tradition for
the grove, and buys a copy of “Inside a Magical Lodge” by John Michael Greer. 
Most
Mesoamerican cosmologies have multiple creations of the world, and the Desert
Southwest tribes have a myth of first emergence from a holy place as central to 
their
religious practices. Prayers and dances for rain, good crops and health are 
important as
well, so Velociraptrix decides to incorporate staff or stick dances, turquoise 
and parrot
feathers into her practices. For her initial altar (a decorated box of local 
wood that is
bolted to the wall and folds down to open as an altar) she chooses an 
arrangement
of rocks, feathers and turquoise, with a white porcelain bowl with rain symbols 
on it
to represent celestial waters. She makes a note to schedule some time for rain 
rituals
late in the year, and will ultimately make a wall altar for each direction and 
element.

Velociraptrix’s Resource List

Druidcraft, Philip Carr-Gomm; Druid Mysteries, Philip Carr-Gomm; The Book
of Druidry, Ross Nichols, edited by Philip Carr-Gomm; A Scattering of Jades: 
Stories,
Poems and Prayers of the Aztecs, Dr. T.J. Knab, translated by Thelma D. 
Sullivan; Warrior
for Gringostroika, Guillermo Gomez-Pena; Cultures of Habitat, Gary Paul Nabhan;
Dreamtime, Hans Peter Duerr, translated by Felicitas Goodman; Storytelling: 
Process
and Practice, Norma J. Livo, Sandra A. Rietz; The Singer of Tales, Albert B. 
Lord; Inside
a Magical Lodge: Group Ritual in the Western Tradition, John Michael Greer


Chapter 2: About the AODA

The AODA is an all-volunteer order—those who are serving in any leadership
capacity have no financial compensation or financial stake in the AODA. AODA is
registered as a Religious Non-Profit in the United States of America, and the 
Grand
Grove Archdruids serve as its board of directors. AODA makes a number of regular
contributions to non-profit organizations that help preserve and protect the 
earth: The
United Plant Savers, The Xerces Society, The Audubon Society, and The Lady Bird
Johnson Wildflower Center, among others.

This section provides an overview of the Ancient Order of Druids in Amer-
ica—how it is structured, the groups, and general organizational information.

Key AODA Groups and Information

The AODA offers interactive forums, including special areas for Candidates, 
Appren-
tices, Companions, and Adepts at: http://forum.aoda.org

The AODA has a website at: www.aoda.org

The AODA has a Facebook group: https://www.facebook.com/groups/AODADruidry/

The AODA also has a listing of public and private Home Circles, Study Groups, 
and
Groves—these are groups of people who come together to study and practice 
druidry.
You can view our current list here: http://aoda.org/Study_Groups_Groves.html

AODA Designations

The AODA has four kinds of members—these members represent how far a
person has worked through the Order’s curriculum. Note that it is not necessary 
to
work through any of the AODA’s curriculum (although we highly encourage it); 
once
you are accepted for membership, you have a lifetime membership in the AODA and
will receive benefits as such.


Candidates: Candidates are those in their first year of study with the AODA
or who have chosen not to pursue formal study in the AODA and simply remain
as members. Most Candidates are people who are working on their first degree, 
the
degree of Druid Ovate, or Bardic Apprentice. For some, the Candidate year takes
a single year—but for others it might take much longer. We encourage you to take
as much time as necessary to work through your candidate curriculum and gain the
deep insights it provides. Those with prior experience in druidry or other 
earth-based
paths may find themselves able to work through the curriculum at a different 
pace
than those who are coming to druidry for the first time.Candidates wear white 
robes1
with a yellow cord belt at official AODA grove events.

Apprentices: Individuals who have completed the first degree of study with
the AODA and have earned the degree of Druid Ovate, or Bardic Apprentice. Some
Druid Apprentices choose to continue working toward their second degree, the 
degree
of Druid Companion. Druid apprentices wear white robes with a red cord belt at
official AODA events.

Companions: Individuals who have completed at least two additional years of
study in the AODA’s curriculum and who have completed their second degree. This
earns them the title of Druid, Ovate, or Bardic Companion within the order. 
Druid
companions may hold a Study Group charter within the AODA and perform initi-
ations of Candidates and Apprentices in the AODA. Companions wear white robes
with a blue cord belt.

Adepts: Individuals who have completed all three degrees in the AODA are
honored with the title “Adept.”These are individuals who have completed at 
least six years
(often more) of dedicated study, have designed and completed an original third 
degree
project in a bardic, ovate, or druid path (earning them the title Druid Adept, 
Ovate Adept,
or Bard Adept), and have embraced the core of AODA’s practices as a substantial 
part of

1. White robes are traditional within druidry; one of the few surviving rituals 
from the Ancient
Druids included druids in white robes harvesting mistletoe from an oak tree.  
However, given the
connections of white robes with certain racist groups in the United States, we 
recognize that not
all      druids are comfortable wearing white. In AODA, members may opt to add 
additional colors
(tabards, sashes, and so on) to their white robes or choose a robe of a 
different color. For us, the
belt color is the key to identifying members of the AODA.


their spiritual path. Adepts can initiate Candidates, Apprentices, and 
Companions and
also can hold an AODA Grove Charter. Adepts wear white robes and a green cord 
belt.

Druid Ollaves: Those who have completed initiations into all three branches
of study as an Adept (Druid, Bard, and Ovate) are given the additional title of 
Ollave.
Ollaves wear a purple cord belt.

The Grand Grove

The AODA Grand Grove has four Archdruids and three Appointed Officers. The
Grand Grove oversees the Order, charters Study Groups and Groves, manages the
curriculum, and preserves the teachings and traditions of the order. New 
Archdruids are
selected from among the Adepts in the order by the current Archdruids and are 
voted
onto the Grand Grove by the other Archdruids. Appointed Officers can be of any 
rank,
and they are those who have shown leadership and a capacity to serve the order 
and are
voted upon by the Archdruids. Duties for each of the positions are determined 
by the
Grand Archdruid, and so, the positions and duties may rotate as our leadership 
changes.
We also have a number of other volunteers who contribute to the order in 
various ways.

The Grand Grove consists of the following officers:

•    The Grand Archdruid (Archdruid of Earth): The Head of the Ancient Order
of Druids in America

•    The Archdruid of Water

•    The Archdruid of Fire

•    The Archdruid of Air

•    The Grand Pendragon (Appointed Officer)

•    The Grand Almoner (Appointed Officer)

•    The Grand Herald (Appointed Officer)

Archdruids wear white robes and white cord belts at official AODA grove events.

Appointed Officers wear white robes and orange cord belts at AODA grove events.

Additional positions and offices are created by the Grand Grove as needed.

AODA’s Groves and Groups

Many AODA members prefer to work in a solitary form, while others prefer the
companionship of other druids. The AODA offers three kinds of groups for its 
members:


Home Circles: Home circles are informal groups where AODA members and
friends come together to learn more about the bardic, ovate, and druid arts. We 
have a
full guide for the Home Circle groups currently in development. Any member of 
the
AODA, regardless of standing, can form and lead a home circle, and for those who
feel called to offer space for community and mutual growth, we strongly 
encourage it.

Study Groups: Study Groups are an officially chartered group with the AODA,
led by Companions in the AODA. As such, study groups can initiate Candidates and
Apprentices into the order.

Groves:  AODA Groves are officially chartered groups led by an Adept.  As
such, Groves can initiate Companions, Candidates, and Apprentices into the order
and offer advanced mentoring and support for members.

Ordination and the Gnostic Celtic Church

The AODA also offers an ordination program through the Gnostic Celtic
Church, which is a branch of the AODA. The GCC functions as the center of the
religious dimension of the AODA tradition, and is responsible for the education 
and
ordination of Druid clergy in AODA, through which it offers a separate 
curriculum. This
program is available for those members who have completed the degree of 
Apprentice
and higher. Visit the AODA website for more information.

A Brief History of the AODA

Founded in 1912 as the American branch of the Ancient and Archaeological
Order of Druids, AODA is a traditional Druid order rooted in the Druid Revival
of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, offering an opportunity for modern
people to experience the teachings and practices of Druidry in today’s world. We
don’t claim direct descent from the original Druids—the priestly caste of 
ancient
Britain, Ireland, and Gaul, which went extinct around 1,200 years ago—and to be
honest, we’re skeptical of any group that does make that claim. Instead, like 
other
modern Druid groups, the AODA evolved out of a 300-year-old movement, the
Druid Revival, that found the fragmentary legacy of the ancient Druids a 
powerful
source of inspiration and insight and drew on a wide range of sources in 
shaping a
nature spirituality to meet the challenges of today. More on the AODA’s history 
can
be found here: http://aoda.org/AODA_History.html


Trilithon

The official publication of the AODA is Trilithon: The Journal of the Ancient
Order of Druids in America. We publish Trilithon once a year at the Summer 
Solstice.
Trilithon features articles from AODA members and friends of the AODA as well as
interviews and reproductions of hard-to-find druid revival material. We very 
much
welcome new members to contribute articles and insights to Trilithon. Back 
issues of
Trilithon are released as PDF after two years. You can download and/or order 
paper
copies of issues at the following URL: 
http://aoda.org/publications/issues.html. Any
AODA members and friends may submit articles to Trilithon at any time.

Newsletter

The AODA also offers a newsletter for all members via email. The newsletter
is released on the Solstices and Equinoxes and offers news, updates, 
meditations, and
more.  You are automatically signed up for the newsletter when you join the 
AODA.


Chapter 3: The AODA First
Degree Curriculum

This chapter offers a full description of the AODA’s first degree curriculum, 
the
curriculum that you can choose to pursue as a candidate in the AODA. The 
following
chapters will provide additional discussion and insight on the curriculum as 
you begin
to work through your candidate year.

The following requirements have been established by the Grand Grove for
advancement to the First Degree of AODA, the Degree of Apprentice.

The Earth Path

1. At least once each week during your Candidate year, spend fifteen min-
utes or more in direct contact with the natural world. This may be in a wild 
place
(such as a forest or a seashore), in a place recovered by nature (such as an 
overgrown
vacant lot), or in a place created by humanity and nature together (such as a 
garden or
a park). Part of your time in nature should be spent in the practice of 
stillness, which
simply involves sitting, keeping your mind empty of thoughts and distractions, 
and
being wordlessly aware of everything around you. Part should be spent in the 
practice
of focus, which involves detailed attention to some specific thing – a tide 
pool, a wild
plant, the living things in a six-inch-square patch of grass, or the like.

2. Read at least nine books on the natural history of the local ecological
region in which you live, learning about the living things, the natural 
ecosystems
and biotic communities, the patterns of weather and water, and the natural 
trans-
formations of the land over time. Relate as much of this information as 
possible to
your    own experiences of nature. (Please note: the point of this requirement 
is to learn
about your local ecological region itself, the land, its biomes, and the 
nonhuman living
things that inhabit it. Books on general ecology or environmental science, 
without a


specific focus on either the local ecological region in which you live or a 
slightly larger
area which includes your local region, don’t satisfy the requirement; neither 
do books
about human peoples and cultures, or books about human impact on the 
environment.)
For most people, your local ecological region will extend no more than 100 
miles from
your home, and may extend a shorter distance; any major ecological shift 
(woodland
to prairie, mountains to plain, desert to grassland, hardwood forest to 
softwood forest,
etc.) marks the end of your local region.

3. Make three changes in your lifestyle in order to take less from the Earth
and give more back, and maintain those changes through your Candidate year.
Different people lead different lives, and a change that would be easy for one 
might
be difficult or impossible for another; Druidry also affirms the need of 
individuals to
make their own choices, so the choice of changes to make is left up to each 
candidate.
Whatever you choose should be something you’re willing to keep doing for an 
entire
year;        a small change you can sustain is better than a larger one that 
proves unworkable.

Some things that would meet the requirements of the Earth Path include
buying locally grown organic food, even when it costs more; using public 
transit,
bicycling, or walking to work, every day or at regular intervals, instead of 
driving;
decreasing your household energy use by, for instance, replacing an electric 
appliance
with        a hand-powered one; replacing toxic cleaning or yard products with 
ecologically
safe ones; composting your kitchen scraps and yard waste; and so on. Donations 
and
the like supporting political or environmental advocacy organizations do not 
qualify.
The Earth Path requires you to change your own life, rather than trying to make 
other
people change theirs.

4. Plant at least one tree during your Candidate year, and water and tend it
until it is well established. Should you be unable to plant a tree outside, 
please contact
the Grand Grove for permission to plant and tend an indoor tree of some kind, 
such
as a bonsai.

The Sun Path

During your Candidate year, celebrate a cycle of Druid holy days. In the AODA
the two solstices (approximately December 21 and June 21 each year) and the two
equinoxes (approximately March 20 and September 23 each year) are traditionally
celebrated and should be a part of your Druid calendar. Many members of the 
AODA


also celebrate the “cross quarter days” of Imbolc (February 2), Belteinne (May 
1),
Lughnasadh (August 1), and Samhuinn (November 1), while others choose different
days based on their own spiritual and cultural interests. You are free to do 
either of
these, or to celebrate the solstices and equinoxes alone.

The holy days may be celebrated alone or with others, using a ritual you create
yourself or one drawn from other sources. Participation in community 
celebrations
qualifies, so long as your role in the celebration is not simply that of a 
spectator. Write
a detailed account of each celebration in your Druid journal, and write at 
least nine
pages on the place of seasonal celebrations in your own Druid path and in the 
Druid
tradition in general.

The Moon Path

Practice some form of meditation regularly during your Candidate year. While
any form of meditation that involves focusing and directing the attention will 
qualify,
the particular method taught in The Druidry Handbook, which is called 
“discursive
meditation,” is particularly recommended. While many people who are new to med-
itation need to work up to daily practice, daily meditation should be part of 
your life
by the end of your Candidate year. In addition, the Sphere of Protection ritual 
should
be learned and practiced daily during your Candidate year. See Chapter 7 for 
more
information.

Ovate, Bardic, or Druid Exploration

The work of our Order has three branches, reflecting the threefold division
of the ancient Celtic Druids. Ovate work in the AODA engages with the natural
and earth sciences, so that we better understand the world that we revere and 
the
systems of the earth that we seek to strengthen. Bardic work in the AODA is 
about
creative and skilled expression, rather than mass production or mindless making 
and
consumption. Druid study in the AODA includes the knowledge and practices that
engage with the more inward, esoteric, and transcendent aspects of our 
consciousness
such as religious practice, spirituality, and mysticism. (See Chapter 8 for 
more detailed
information about the three branches.)

In the First Degree, we require simply that you choose and carry out an activity
that introduces you to some aspect of one of these three branches that you do 
not
already know or practice.


Examples of activities that qualify as Explorations for the First Degree include
the following:

•     Taking a series of classes on a relevant subject, such as painting or 
bird identification

•     Doing volunteer work in a relevant field, such as habitat restoration or 
arts therapy

•     Designing and carrying out a personal course of study in a relevant area

•     Enrolling in a correspondence course that fits into one of the three 
branches
and completing it satisfactorily

If you have any questions about the appropriateness of an activity as an Explo-
ration, please contact the Grand Grove with the details. Your Exploration should
involve at least 20 hours of work on your part in a single subject, and it must 
be in a
subject that is new to you. If you are already a guitar player, for example, 
taking further
classes in playing the guitar will not count as an Exploration, nor will taking 
up another
stringed instrument. On the other hand, taking a class in a radically different 
musical
instrument, such as the clarinet or the bagpipe, would qualify; equally, taking 
a class
in painting or poetry would qualify. The point of this requirement is to 
encourage you
to expand your horizons.

Your choice of an Exploration in the First Degree does not limit your choice of
a direction in the Second—thus you can do a Bardic Exploration in the First 
Degree,
for example, and go on to become an Ovate or Druid Companion in the Second.
Your choice of an Exploration will, however, determine your title as an 
Apprentice,
for you will be initiated as either an Ovate Apprentice, a Bard Apprentice, or 
a Druid
Apprentice. You may, if you wish, do an Exploration in more than one branch of 
our
Order, and receive more than one title at your Apprentice initiation.

Your Druid Notebook

During your Candidate year, you should keep a running account of the work
you do in each of the three Paths and your Ovate, Bard, or Druid Exploration. 
The
notebook may be kept in any form or medium from a three ring binder, through a
handmade and handbound book, to a computer file.  The notebook is entirely for
your  own use, and you will not be expected to show it in its entirety to 
anyone else,
but you will need to copy down material from it in order to pass the examination
at the end of your Candidate year, and you will find that the more complete you
make your notebook, the more valuable of a resource it will be to you later in 
your
Druid path.


Chapter 4: The Earth Path

Lifestyle Changes: The Metaphor of the Mountain

Many of our members find their way to druidry because they are looking for
a deeper connection with nature and a way to begin to live a life that allows 
them to
tread more lightly upon the living earth. Our curriculum is in line with this 
ideal, as
it asks members to make and maintain three lifestyle changes.

One of the ways to consider lifestyle changes is like climbing a mountain. We
are all starting from somewhere, and for many of us, that somewhere is the 
product of
living in a culture that has disconnected itself from the living earth. 
Currently, culturally
speaking in North America, many of the systems in place for everyday living 
actively
or passively damage the earth’s ecosystems.  The amount of work that we need to 
do
individually and culturally to mitigate this damage seems enormous—and it is, 
on a
cultural level.  This is, so to speak, the mountain itself.

Mountains are never climbed in a single day. Mountain climbing takes prepa-
ration, planning, and most of all, time. This is why we ask you to choose and 
sustain
three changes—these are the paths up the mountain. Keep this in mind as you 
begin
your earth path changes.  It is also easier to climb a mountain with a group 
than on
one’s own.  Your three changes are combined with the changes of the 1000+ other
AODA members from the Americas and beyond.

Tree Planting

We ask that you plant at least one tree during your Candidate year and tend it
until it is grown. Some members have difficulty with this requirement due to 
the lack
of owning their own land and/or affording to purchase a tree to plant. We 
recommend
the following suggestions:


•      Speak to friends and family who own their own land.  See if they are 
willing to
have you plant a tree and tend it until it is grown.

•     Ask if a tree would be appropriate at a local business, community park, 
or other
public space.

•     Attend a tree planting day and continue to return to tend the tree after 
it is planted.

•     The Arbor Day foundation offers free trees and also allows you to select 
very
low cost trees. These are very suitable trees and many of our members have had
success with them.  Often, in the US, State Extension offices may also know
where you can get local trees for free or at a reduced cost for planting or to
request permission for an indoor tree.

Before planting your tree, we suggest reviewing the tree planting guidelines
found at the Arbor Day foundation: https://www.arborday.org/trees/planting/. If 
you
are still having difficulty, feel free to contact the Grand Grove at 
info@aoda.org for more
assistance.

We also recommend that readers explore Appendix D for an AODA Tree
Planting ritual to use when you plant your tree.

Finding Nine Books on Nature

You are asked to find and read nine books on the natural history or local 
ecology
of your region. This requirement can sometimes present difficulty for 
candidates when
they begin to seek out books on their local bioregion.  We recommend the 
following
sources to explore potential options:

•     Your local library will often carry many books that are specific to your 
bioregion.
If they do not have them, the library can use a process called “inter-library
loan” to borrow a book from a different library for you. This is usually free to
library patrons.

•     Local used bookstores are good places to look for books on natural 
history and
ecology.

•      Google Books and Project Gutenberg offer many free books in digital 
format
that are out of copyright.  Older guides can be found on many topics, and this
information is often still quite up to date.

•     In the USA, your local State Extension office often has one or more 
experts who
can tell you more about resources for learning your bioregion.


•     Local historical tourist attractions may seem a bit of an odd choice to 
find books,
but these often carry a number of books relevant to the history in which they
promote and often will include flora and fauna guides.

You can also search online retailers for appropriate books. Consider the search
terms that you use when searching for books: you might need to broaden your 
terms
(while Cambria County, PA local ecology does not return any results, specifying
“Northern Appalachian Mountain Ecology” and “Laurel Highland Region” does).

We suggest that in order to make the most of your nine books, you read them
and then directly apply them to your time spent in nature. That is, there is 
more value
in connecting these two aspects of the earth path than in isolating gaining 
knowledge
with direct experience.


Chapter 5: The Sun Path

The Sun Path Symbolism

The following is an introduction to the core symbolism of the AODA; this will
be helpful to you as you learn the Sphere of Protection (see Chapter 7) and 
work on
your path as a druid working within the AODA tradition.

Awen

One of the central concepts in Revival Druidry is “Awen” (prounounced
A-wen; chanted in our rituals as Ah-Oh-En). The Awen is the symbol of the AODA
(represented in the three rays of light with the elements surrounding the 
circle.)
In          the ancient traditions, this Awen was the divine inspiration that 
bards or poets
would draw upon in order to create and perform masterpieces of poetry and song.
In modern Druidry, we work to embrace Awen and cultivate our creative gifts in
many different areas of our lives.   In this way, the most simple definition of 
Awen
is that it is the inner light of inspiration. For an extended discussion of 
Awen and
its role in the Druid Tradition, please see John Michael Greer’s Druidry 
Handbook.


Directions, Colors, and Animals of the AODA

The AODA works with the following associations in our rituals and symbolism.
Given their own paths, AODA members may find it appropriate to develop their own
correspondences in addition to the ones given.


Symbol

Element

Air

Fire

Water

Earth

Direction

East

South

West

North

Time of
Year

Spring
(Equinox)

Summer
(Solstice)

Fall
(Equinox)

Winter
(Solstice)

Moon
Phase

Waxing
Moon

Full
Moon

Waining
Moon

New/Dark
Moon

Color

Yellow

Red

Blue

Green

Sacred
Animal

The Hawk of
May soaring in
the heights of
the morning air
The White Stag
in the heat of
the Summer
Greenwood
The                Salmon of
Wisdom who
dwells in the
sacred pool

The Great Bear
of the Starry
Heavens

The Three Currents

Most of the world’s spiritual traditions include the concept of a life force or
subtle energy that is present in all things and gives them life and power. In 
the Welsh
folk traditions from which the Druid Revival drew much of its lore, which is 
one of the
currents upon which the AODA draws, the term for this force is nwyfre 
(pronounced
NOO-iv-ruh). While nwyfre is everywhere, it may be accessed most readily by way
of certain currents or flows that are related to familiar natural phenomena. 
The two
primary currents of nwyfre in AODA grove work, and in the AODA system generally,
are the solar and telluric currents.

The solar current has its source in the sun and descends from above. It flows
wherever light from the sky can reach, and even penetrates a short distance 
down into


the soil.  The other planets of the solar system reflect the solar current to 
earth just
as they reflect the sun’s light, and their cycles shape the flow of the solar 
current in
ways that can be tracked by astrology and other magical traditions of time.  
The solar
current’s traditional symbols in myth and legend are birds such as the eagle, 
the hawk,
and the heron. Magical writings sometimes call it aud or od, and in alchemy it 
is the
Sun.  Its primary symbol in Druid lore is the circle, representing the sun’s 
orb, and it
relates to the ray of Spirit Above. It is symbolically masculine, and its color 
is gold.

The telluric current takes its name from Tellus, an old name for the earth, and
rises from below. It takes its form and character from the landscape the way 
the solar
current takes its character from the turning planets; it is thus defined by 
space rather
than time. The serpent and the dragon are the most common symbols of the 
telluric
current in myth and legend. Its names in occult lore include the secret fire, 
the dragon
current, and aub or ob, and in alchemy it is Mercury. Its primary symbol in 
Druid lore
is the triangle, representing its fiery and transforming nature, and it relates 
to the ray
of Spirit Below. It is symbolically feminine, and its color is green.

In the AODA seasonal rituals and Sphere of Protection, the solar and telluric
currents are imagined respectively as descending from a point far above the 
altar and
ascending from a point far below the altar. When they are brought into contact 
in the
right way, they fuse and form a third current, which becomes the core energy of 
the
seasonal rituals, Sphere of Protection, and the ceremonies of initiation.

This third current is called the lunar current.  Unlike the solar and telluric
currents, the lunar current does not exist naturally; it has to be made, out of 
the bal-
anced fusion of the solar and telluric currents.  The lunar current is called 
aur and or
in occult writings.  Its primary symbol in magical lore is the crescent moon, 
and its
mythic symbols include the egg, the jewel, the sacred cup, and the child.  It 
mediates
between solar and telluric currents in the same way that the moon mediates 
between
sun and earth.  Its color is white.

With the formation of the lunar current at the center of the grove, upon the
top of the altar, the energies of the grove take on their full sevenfold 
pattern: the
four material elements at the four quarters, the solar and telluric currents 
above and
below, and the lunar current at the center. Regular individual practice of the 
Sphere
of Protection is, therefore, critical to assisting you in developing your 
ability to work


with these currents in a number of ways—and as you go through your studies, you 
will
discover and be given new ways to work with these three currents!

The fusion of the solar and telluric currents that gives rise to the lunar 
current
may only be performed in a place of balance.  It is for this reason that the 
four ele-
ments and their powers are awakened first in the grove opening ceremony, and the
three currents worked thereafter. This is also the reason why the grove closing 
cere-
mony includes a specific phase in which the powers of the elements are thanked 
and
allowed to withdraw, but there is nothing equivalent for the three currents. 
The solar
and telluric currents are always present, while the lunar current ceases to be 
present
as soon as the stabilizing forces of the elements are withdrawn.

The Three Druid Elements

In addition to the four-fold elemental system, AODA also recognizes the
three druid element system from the Druid Revival. These three terms use Welsh
words and pronunciations (like many other things coming out of Revival Druidry).
They do not cleanly map onto the four elements, rather, they are an alternative
elemental system that emphasizes different properties of the world. They are 
three
archetypes, three ways of representing the inner and outer worlds of our experi-
ence.         For more information about the three elements, see The Druidry 
Handbook.

Nwyfre (NOOiv-ruh): This first druid element is represents the life force and
consciousness within each living being.  It is associated with the sky and the 
heavens;
it represents the spirit of things; the mind.  The term means “sky” or “heaven” 
in the
Welsh language.  When we chant “AWEN” we are invoking nwyfre, the spark of 
life.

Gwyar (GOO-yar) – This druid element represents the principle of flow, of move-
ment, and of change. It is associated with the energy of the water (although is 
not
limited to it); it represents the change that is inherent in all living things. 
The term
means “flow” or “fluidity” in the Welsh language and we can refer to it as 
energy flows
(in physical manifestation) of all kinds.

Calas (CAH-lass) – The final druid element is Calas, representing solidity or 
sub-
stance. Calas is that which is the physical manifestation of things within the 
world:
their form, their substance, and their features that help distinguish them. 
This is the
Welsh word for “hard” or “stability.”


AODA’s Seasonal Celebrations and Holy Days

AODA recognizes the solstices and equinoxes as druid holy days, and asks that
AODA members celebrate them in some way. Please note that the only requirement
is that you celebrate the ceremonies, not that you celebrate the ceremonies 
provided.
Included in this guide are four seasonal celebrations that work specifically 
with the three
currents of energy, primary foci of AODA’s ritual work (see more on these 
currents in
this chapter; see ceremonies in Appendix C). These ceremonies are particularly 
useful
for healing and blessing our earth. A more neopagan-focused set of ceremonies, 
also
appropriate for AODA work, can be found in the Druidry Handbook.  For 
ceremonies

in group format, see the Druid Grove Handbook.

The Druid Revival from its start had focused its seasonal cycle on the solstices
and equinoxes—the Alban Gates, as these were called, borrowing the term from the
old Welsh names for these festivals. People who come to AODA nowadays out of the
current Pagan scene tend to ask why the four “cross quarter” days—Imbolc, 
Beltane,
Lammas, and Samhain—are not included in the AODA’s calendar. The answer is 
simple:
these were not celebrated at the time the AODA was formed in 1912. The 
eightfold year
did not exist before the early 1950s, when Ross Nichols of the Order of Bards, 
Ovates,
and Druids and Gerald Gardner, the founder of modern Wicca, assembled it out of
two earlier calendars. Because AODA predates this assemblage, we officially 
recognize
the solstices and equinoxes, although many of our members choose to celebrate 
the
cross quarter days. However, Druids drawing upon other spiritual traditions in 
addition
to their druid practice (Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity, Neopaganism, etc.) 
may
choose to add holidays to their practice as they see fit.  We encourage all 
members to
choose additional celebration dates based on their own personal belief system.

According to an archaic astrology, still preserved in occult traditions as well 
as
other traditions from around the globe, the solstices and equinoxes are gates 
through
which celestial energies descend to Earth. Rituals performed at these times can 
draw
on these currents of energy and then radiate them outward into the human 
community
and the world as a whole as a blessing. The old belief that the fertility of 
fields and
flocks depends on the proper performance of certain ceremonies at certain times 
of
the year is a relic of this ancient tradition.

The solstices and equinoxes have their special role because they govern the 
rela-
tionship between Sun and Earth. At the equinoxes, the Sun is at the point in 
Earth’s


skies where the ecliptic (the apparent path of the Sun against the background 
of stars)
crosses the celestial equator (the projection of Earth’s equator into the 
heavens). This
conjunction allows a direct flow of nwyfre to descend from Sun to Earth. The 
solstices,
for     their part, are the points at which the Sun’s movement along the 
ecliptic takes it
furthest from the celestial equator; it represents the peak of polarity between 
Sun and
Earth; the point in time at which these two powers—and the solar and telluric 
currents
that unfold from them—balance and complement each other most completely.

The four Alban Gates of the Druid Revival, and hence, AODA Druidry, each
correspond to one of the four Royal Stars of ancient astrology. The 
correspondence
between gates and stars has changed with the precession of the equinoxes—the 
slow
shift of the ecliptic relative to the celestial equator that takes their points 
of contact a
degree back through the Zodiac every 72 years. The correspondences now used came
into effect with the beginning of the Age of Aquarius in 1879, and will remain 
in
effect for 4320 years, until the beginning of the Age of Sagittarius:

•     Alban Eiler (spring equinox)               Fomalhaut

•     Alban Heruin (summer solstice)         Aldebaran

•     Alban Elued (autumn equinox)           Regulus

•     Alban Arthuan (winter solstice)          Antares

The Druid Altar

The AODA, for its seasonal celebrations presented here and in the Druid Grove
Handbook, uses a central altar for its workings. A druid’s altar is highly 
personalized
space, a space that you can see as a small space set aside in your home or 
outdoors as
a focus for your spiritual life.

Minimally, for our celebrations you will need four bowls for earth (soil or 
salt),
air (incense), fire (a candle), and water (a bowl of water); these are the four 
basic
working elements we invoke in our rituals and in the Sphere of Protection. 
Symbolic
for  the AODA also is a sickle (look for one at secondhand or antique malls) and
a sprig of mistletoe (the small packets sold for the holidays are perfectly 
suitable);
this symbolism comes from one of the remaining fragments of Ancient Druid ritual
discussed by Pliny the Elder in the 1st century AD in his Natural History. If 
you are
unable to find mistletoe, or it does not grow in your bioregion, substitute a 
conifer,
like cedar, pine, or juniper). If you can get one, a double-edged, straight 
sword with a


sheath is useful (if not, a small knife or no sword at all will do). These are 
the primary
working tools for the AODA Candidate grade.  Our rituals will also suggest a 
color
of altar cloth (which can be made from an old bedsheet, piece of fabric, drape, 
etc.)
and other decorations befitting of the season.

The remaining items for your altar are highly personal and entirely dependent
on your own path as a druid. Common items may include statuary of animals or 
deity;
natural objects such as stones or wood, images, additional candles, and other 
small
objects, and your colored cord belt.

Your altar can remain up in your home or outdoors permanently and you can
use it as a site for your daily meditation and sphere of protection rituals. We 
recognize
that not everyone is able to do this, so the other option is to stow things 
away in a safe
place and set the altar up when you need it.

Druid Ritual

Those completely new to nature spirituality or coming from a non-religious
background may question the use and purpose of “ritual” in our tradition. 
Ritual is
as           a religious or spiritual ceremony with a set of actions, 
symbolism, energetics and
meaning that is performed. Ritual in some form is present in every human 
culture; it
offers us a way to mark important events, to honor the passage of time, and set 
aside
time from everyday life to focus on the sacred. In the AODA we use ritual to 
celebrate
the passing of time through the solstices and equinoxes, for initiation 
purposes, and
through the daily working of the Sphere of Protection. As you continue your 
studies
in   the AODA, you may feel led to develop your own set of druid rituals to 
supplement
those that are offered.

Ritual puts us in a different kind of space, a sacred space. Our grove opening
transitions us into this sacred space and our grove closing ritual serves to 
transition
us   back. For those new to ritual, many of us aren’t used to awakening that 
kind of
energy. Even after the ritual ends, you may find yourself in an altered state 
of con-
sciousness, which might include feeling lightheaded, ungrounded, extremely 
energized
or unbalanced after ritual. This is a common occurrence. We suggest eating a 
hearty
meal, which is one of the best ways to “ground” and return to your normal state 
of
consciousness.


Chapter 6: The Moon Path

This chapter covers material related to the moon path’s meditation requirement
as well as your druid journal. Regular practice of the Sphere of Protection is 
covered
in Chapter seven of this guide.

A Druid Meditation Primer

By John Michael Greer, Grand Archdruid Emeritus, AODA

The approach to meditation that has been part of Druid traditions since early
in the Revival echoes other meditation methods in many ways, but there’s one 
signif-
icant difference. This lies in the attitudes toward the thinking mind. Most 
systems of
meditation teach the student to stop thinking altogether, by using mantras 
(special
patterns  of spoken sound) or symbolic visualizations, or concentrating on 
thought-stop-
ping paradoxes such as the koans of Zen. This is effective enough as a way to 
achieve
meditative states of consciousness, but too often it has the awkward side 
effect of
producing mystics who can reach profound spiritual states but can’t think 
clearly.

In Druid meditation, by contrast, the more common path is to train and reori-
ent the mind instead of shutting it down. Druidry, like other mystical 
traditions, has
long recognized that reason divorced from reality and from other (and equally 
valid)
forms of human experience is a form of madness. Ever since the time of 
Pythagoras,
though, Western mystics and sages have also recognized that the mind need not
be  the enemy of the spirit, if it’s brought into harmony with itself, with the 
larger
human self of which it forms a part, and with the cosmos as a whole. The 
rational can
be     a vehicle for the spiritual: this is the premise (and the promise) of 
most Western
mystical paths, and this approach was adopted into Druidry from the earliest 
days
of    the Druid Revival.

Central to this process is the ability to think in a meditative way. Like 
everything
else, this takes practice, and you’ll find that the more often you practice 
meditation,


the more effectively you can do this; daily practice is essential if you plan 
on getting
good at it.

In this form of meditation, which is called discursive meditation, the thinking
process is not stopped but redirected and clarified; thoughts are not abolished 
but
made into a vehicle for the deeper movement of consciousness. This is typically 
done
by focusing the mind on a specific topic, and allowing it to follow out the 
implications
of that topic through a chain of ideas, while at the same time keeping it 
focused on
the topic without straying. By doing this, the meditator gradually transforms 
thinking
from half-random mental chatter into a powerful and focused way of 
understanding;
at the same time, the knowledge that comes out of meditation of this sort can 
have a
good deal of value on its own terms.

The mind of the meditator thus focuses on a previously chosen image or idea, 
which
is called the theme of the meditation. The meditator considers the theme and 
follows out
its implications and consequences, restraining the mind whenever it tries to 
stray from the
theme but giving it free rein to follow the theme as far as it can. Thus this 
form of medi-
tation has two positive effects. Like every other form of meditation, it 
teaches mastery of
attention and awareness. Unlike most other forms of meditation, it enables the 
meditator
to understand the themes of meditation to a depth that ordinary thinking rarely 
reaches.
Furthermore, many of the myths, symbols and teachings of the Druid tradition 
are spe-
cifically designed to yield up their meaning only to careful, focused 
attention. Discursive
meditation thus becomes a key to the inner dimensions of the Druid path.

Certain preliminaries are valuable. The most important is the selection of a
theme. Every aspect of Druid study and practice can provide themes; books worth
studying are among the most common sources. Beginners often choose vast sprawl-
ing themes and either flounder about in them or skate over the surface, missing 
the
potential depths of the practice. As a general rule, if your theme takes more 
than a
fairly short sentence to describe, it’s too large for a single meditation and 
should be
broken up into smaller bits, then recombined later.

Start meditation practice by sitting down on a chair with a plain, cushion-
less seat. Sit far enough forward on it that your lower back isn’t resting 
against the
back of the chair. Your feet should be flat on the floor. Straighten your back 
without
stiffening it, and hold your head upright, without letting it slump forward. 
Your


hands rest palm down on your thighs, and your elbows are against your sides. 
This
posture for meditation, unlike the cross-legged positions common in Eastern sys-
tems of meditation, doesn’t seal your energies off from the rest of the cosmos. 
This
is an important aspect of Druid spiritual practice; as Druids, we are always 
part of
a larger world.

Most people find it useful to meditate in the same place each day, and at the
same time of day (or the same point in the daily cycle for those who have 
variable
schedules - right before breakfast, say). If possible, it’s best to meditate 
facing east, to
take advantage of currents in the subtle body of the Earth. A clock placed so 
that you
can see it without moving your head completes the setting for meditation 
practice.

Once you’ve settled into your position, consciously relax each part of your
body, starting with your feet and moving step by step up to the top of your 
head. Then
spend a few minutes paying conscious attention to your breath, breathing in and 
out
slowly, evenly and fully. A traditional breathing exercise called the Fourfold 
Breath
is commonly used here. Breathe slowly in while counting mentally from one to 
four;
hold your breath in, while counting from one to four; breathe out, counting 
from one
to four; and hold the breath out, with the lungs empty, while counting from one 
to
four, and repeat. The counts should all be at the same pace, and the breath 
should be
held in or out with the muscles of the chest and diaphragm, not by closing the 
throat,
which can lead to health problems.

After you’ve paid attention to your breathing for perhaps five minutes, turn
to the theme of the meditation. State the theme silently to yourself in a few 
words,
or visualize it before you in a single image. Keep your mind focused on it for 
a time,
and then start thinking about it, turning it over and over in your mind, 
exploring its
implications and connections. Choose one of these that appeals to you, and 
follow it
out         as far as you can. When your thoughts veer from it, as they almost 
certainly will
in the early stages of training, don’t simply bring them back to the theme; 
follow your
straying thoughts back to the point where they left the train of thought you 
were
following, and proceed from there. Over time, this will teach your mind to 
return to
your theme as readily as it strays from it.

It’s important to set a period of time for the meditation in advance, and stick
to that, even if you don’t think you’re making any progress at all. Five 
minutes of


breathing and ten minutes of actual meditation makes a good length of practice 
ses-
sion for beginners. When you’re done, pay attention to your breathing or 
practice the
Fourfold Breath again for a minute or so to help yourself make the transition 
back to
ordinary awareness.

There are other details of practice, expansions of technique, and additional
methods that can be combined with discursive meditation to strengthen its 
effects and
make  it applicable to many different forms of spiritual practice, in and out 
of Druidry.
Some of these, and a great deal more on discursive meditation itself, are 
covered in
more detail in The Druidry Handbook.

Recommended Reading

Useful books with material on discursive meditation include these:

•      John Michael Greer The Druidry Handbook (Weiser, 2006).

•     Adelaide Gardner Meditation: A Practical Study (Wheaton, IL: Quest, 
1968).

•     William G. Gray Western Inner Workings (York Beach, ME: Weiser, 1983).

•      Manly Palmer Hall Self-Unfoldment by Disciplines of Realization (Los 
Angeles:
Philosophical Research Society, 1942).

•      Gareth Knight Occult Exercises and Practices (Albuquerque, NM: Sun 
Chalice,
1998).

•      Mouni Sadhu Concentration: A Guide to Mental Mastery (No. Hollywood, CA:
Wilshire, 1959).

•     Meditation: An Outline for Practical Study (No. Hollywood, CA: Wilshire, 
1967).

•     Ernest Wood Concentration: An Approach to Meditation (Wheaton, IL: Quest,
1949).

On Keeping Your Druid Notebook

We ask that you keep a druid notebook during your candidate year. This note-
book serves several purposes, including to document your growth as a druid, to 
identify
key insights, to write your way to understanding, and to offer a method of 
reflective
practice. Your druid notebook is private; we will never ask to see it.  
However, we will
ask  you to draw from it extensively during your candidate exam when you finish 
your
candidate year, so please keep this in mind.

The act of keeping a notebook or journal as part of regular spiritual and 
medita-
tive practice is a common one in the traditions that have influenced the AODA 
and in


many spiritual and religious traditions globally. The overall goal of the druid 
notebook
is to engage in reflective activity about your druid practice. Reflection is 
when you take
time to think through, mull over, ruminate, ponder and/or consider the 
experiences
you have had. Reflection is an extremely important part of your own development 
as a
druid. Reflection creates the space where real meaning happens, where we slow 
down
and think about what we just did (instead of going from thing to thing to thing 
and
constantly “doing”). It is the space where we synthesize experience and 
understanding,
and   the space where real growth and learning happens. The druid notebook 
creates
space for you to do this critically important work.

Because journaling as a regular activity may be new to you, we have a few
suggestions that may help you journal more effectively:

1.  Consider mixed medium notebooks. You can write about your experiences,
and take notes, but you can add photographs, images, paintings, sketches, and
more. Sometimes, a picture helps capture the event or experience in ways that 
words
cannot. Others find that speaking it aloud and recording their experiences, and
later transcribing what they have said, is a useful practice for journaling 
experiences.

2. When you write is important to your progress. If you are meditating, 
celebrating a druid
holy day, engaging in your nature observations, and so forth, you want to write 
your expe-
riences down as soon as you can (preferably, at the conclusion of the 
activity). The reason is
simple: these practices have you in a different headspace than being in 
everyday mundane
living. As you transition back to mundane living, you’ll find that you quickly 
lose insights or
important details you had when you were immersed in that sacred activity. 
Keeping the note-
book with you, and writing immediately after the experience helps you gain 
deeper insights.

3.  Get in the habit of writing. Try to write (in whatever form) at the end of 
each
druid activity, even if you only journal for 5 or 10 minutes. Eventually, 
journaling will
become a regular part of your practice, a natural part of who you are and how 
you
process your experiences.

The question of what should be included in your druid notebook is also of
importance. We require you to write a detailed account of your seasonal 
celebrations in
your journal as part of our study program. Consider your notebook a way to 
document
your journey through this first year. Other things you can include in your 
journal are:


•     Regular reflections on your understanding of Druidry, who you are as a 
devel-
oping Druid

•     Regular reflections on spiritual insights: tracking divinations, energy 
work, prayer,
connections with deity, etc.

•     Regular discussions of the results of your discursive meditations 
(learning med-
itation, insights from meditations, and so on)

•     Your experiences in learning and practicing the SOP, noting particularly 
how
your practices change with time

•     Your insights and observations from being in nature

•     Your experiences in planting the tree during your Candidate year

•     Insights from the nine books on nature

•     Your experiences in studying the bardic, ovate, or druid arts


Chapter 7: Learning the
Sphere of Protection

The Sphere of Protection (SOP) is one of the key daily practices of the AODA,
and in many ways, forms not only the core of our work but also the connection 
to some
of the AODA’s deepest mysteries. The SOP is the oldest part of our tradition. 
Common
in various esoteric circles and religious philosophy is the idea that a daily 
protective and
energetic working is an important part of one’s spiritual development. The SOP 
is also
used   in both the AODA’s solitary grove opening and standard grove opening 
rituals.

The SOP was created in the 1970s by Archdruid Dr. John Gilbert, using material
drawn from several older AODA rituals. The Sphere has three phases:  an 
opening, a
closing, and a middle section in which the core work is done. The opening is 
called the
Elemental Cross, the middle section is the Calling of the Elements, and the 
closing is
the Sphere of Light. The process of learning the Sphere of Protection involves 
a certain
degree of complexity, because each person who learns and practices it is 
expected to
enrich it with personally relevant symbolism.

There are many reasons to perform the SOP, and some you will discover for
yourself as you go along, and some of which will be revealed to you in higher 
degrees.
What this practice is, and what it does for you, can be framed in a number of 
ways
(and as a non-dogmatic order, we encourage you to choose a theory of this 
practice
that fits your own path):

•     As an energetic practice for invoking and banishing energy

•     As a practice aligning with the universal archetypes, energies, or deity

•     As a daily balancing ritual

•     An energizing practice

•     As a focus and movement practice

•     As a daily ritual

•     A way to protect or empower ritual or creative working space


In the most basic sense, as we go through life each day, we pick up a lot of
etheric crud—think about when you’ve witnessed something you didn’t want to see,
when you have experienced a trauma, when you are really stressed about work, and
so on—this crud gets on us and weighs us down. This obscures the light of our 
souls,
our gifts to the world, our ability to create and engage in the bardic arts, 
and to be
whole and actualized people. What the daily Sphere Of Protection helps do, each 
day,
is clear us and protect us from the worst of the crud. Consider it like your 
energetic
buffer for the day.

With all of this said, however, right now, how you conceive of this ritual isn’t
important at this stage in your path in Druidry. What is important is that you 
learn
this ritual well and practice it daily.

Brief Overview of the SOP

In order to discuss the ritual and introduce it to you, the following is a very
brief overview (before going into the detailed instructions and images). The SOP
ritual has three main parts: the Elemental Cross, the Invocation of the Gates, 
and
the Circulation of Light. The SOP also includes four kinds of actions: 
visualization,
energetic work, verbal phrases, and physical movement. First, the Druid begins 
by
invoking the elements or deity and physically and energetically forming an 
Elemental
Cross. Second, the Druid invokes the four elemental gateways by invoking 
positive
qualities of the four elemental energies (Air, Fire, Water, Earth) and 
banishing the
negative qualities of those elements. The positive aspects are those which 
nourish
and enrich the Druid and others while the negative aspects are those which are
considered to be harmful to the Druid or others.  For example, for the element 
of air,
positive qualities include focus, clarity, justice, reason, learning, and clear 
articulation
of ideas, while negative qualities might be pride, aloofness, anger, or 
detachment. The
element of fire might include the positive qualities of passion, determination, 
inspira-
tion, and creativity, while negative qualities might involve intensity, ego, or 
rashness.
The element of water might include the positive qualities of intuition, 
compassion,
empathy, and being in tune with one’s own heart, while the negative qualities 
might
involve emotional volatility, irritability, and oversensitivity.  The positive 
qualities of
earth might include steadfastness, never giving in, and staying the course,  
while the
negative qualities might include stubbornness and not letting go. These 
examples are
only some, of many, qualities of the elements that you can work with as you 
practice
and learn the SOP.


The Druid then invokes the remaining three gateways: the telluric cur-
rent (Spirit Below), the solar current (Spirit Above), and the lunar current 
(Spirit
Within) using language, action, and visualization. The final part of the SOP 
draws
upon these seven energies and circulates light in a protective sphere. This 
protec-
tive sphere is most typically placed around a person or a sacred grove in order 
to
do ritual work, but it can have many other uses, some of which will be revealed 
to
you in later degrees.

While this seems like a lot, the SOP is a ritual of repeated patterns and can be
performed with effect in less than five minutes once it is learned. The key is 
in learning
it and making it a natural part of your path.

The SOP as a Template

The important thing to understand about how the AODA teaches the Sphere
of Protection ritual is that we teach a template of the ritual that can then be 
adapted
to each individual druid’s circumstances and practices. In this guide, we 
present the
full version of the ritual as well as the basic instructions for learning the 
ritual and
symbolism. To learn the ritual, we suggest reading through the full sample and 
then
the     full set of learning instructions (see Appendix A for Full Sample 
Ritual). Then,
begin by doing each step of the ritual (taking a week on each of the steps) 
until you
put the full ritual together. We recommend that you start by learning the full 
version
of the ritual presented here, in The Druidry Handbook, The Druid Magic 
Handbook, or

the AODA Grove Manual, and then adapt it after you’ve learned it.

Learning the Sphere of Protection

Although the SOP can appear simple enough to perform once learned, it is
a powerful practice that requires time and practice to master. Part of this is 
because
the sphere of protection works with four distinct types of activities:

Movement: Movement of the physcial body during the ritual.

Visualization: Visualization in your mind’s eye aspects of this ritual, 
specifically,
symbols, light, and the sphere of energy. Visualization is a skill that takes 
time and
practice to perfect, like any other skill.

Auditory: Parts of the ritual spoken aloud, said in a firm voice.


Energetic: Ultimately, you are working with the subtle flows of the energies of
the earth (telluric) and heavens (solar) and elements (earth, air, fire, and 
water) when
you perform this ritual.  Sensing these, and working with them, are part of the 
long-
term and benefit of the SOP.

Two Ways to Learn the SOP

There are two ways you can learn the SOP. One way, which has been cov-
ered extensively by Grand Archdruid Emeritus John Michael Greer in The Druidry
Handbook and in The Druid Magic Handbook, is to learn the SOP piece by piece,
spending time first learning the elemental cross, then adding in the invocation 
and
banishing of the four elements and spirit above, below, and within, finally 
circulat-
ing   the sphere of light. The pieces are learned together (with visualization, 
auditory
elements, movement) one at a time before moving on. This method works for most
people who learn it, and we would strongly suggest that you begin by reading the
sections in The Druidry Handbook and The Druid Magic Handbook and using that to
learn the SOP.

The second method of learning the SOP is not sequential but based on breaking
it down by the four distinct activities that the SOP includes. It is this 
method that is
presented here as an alternative to material presented in The Druidry Handbook 
and
The Druid Magic Handbook.

Using this Guide

Learning the Sphere of Protection based on activity begins with the set of
movements.  Movements can eventually be part of our muscle memory.

To use this method of learning the SOP, we suggest the following order:
Learn the movements first, until they flow with good effect. Once you have 
mastered
the movements and have practiced them daily for a few weeks, add in the auditory
elements for each of the movements. Again, practice them for a few weeks, and
commit them to memory. Finally, once you feel confident in the movements and
the auditory elements, add in the visualizations.  Eventually, you will do all 
of the
steps in a cohesive movement approach (typically tracing the symbol while saying
the words, then addingvisualizations). Note that some people have difficulty 
with
visualizations; we provide alternatives to visualization later in this chapter.


The SOP is used both as a daily practice and as part of our AODA grove opening.
This guide is designed to help you learn the SOP as a daily practice (with some 
notes
for how to slightly adapt it for grove practice).


The Sphere Of Protection Step by Step

Part I: The Elemental Cross, Step 1

Movement: First, the Druid begins by standing with her arms out at her sides,
facing east (as a daily practice). In a grove ritual, the Druid would instead 
stand in the
north facing south.

Visualization: Imagine the Sun standing at zenith high above your head,
and an equivalent sphere of silver-green fire, which the heart of the Earth, 
far below
your feet.  Be aware of yourself standing between these two spheres.


The Elemental Cross, Step 2

Movement: Druid brings both arms up from the sides in an arc, palms join
above the head before drawing them down together to touch the point between
the eyebrows.

Auditory: “By the sky above me.”

Visualization: Druid imagines a ray of light descending from the Sun with the
movement to form a sphere of golden light within his/her head.


The Elemental Cross, Step 3

Movement: Druid draws the joined palms down to touch the point of the solar 
plexus.

Auditory: “By the earth beneath me.”

Visualization: Imagine the ray of light descending from the head to forming a 
second
sphere of golden light at the solar plexus, then continuing through and beyond 
him/
her until it reaches the sphere of green-gold fire in the heart of the Earth.


The Elemental Cross, Step 4

Movement: Druid leaves left hand where it is and pivots right arm outwards at
the elbow, so that the right arm ends up angling down and outwards in a straight
line from the shoulder, turning the head and facing right.

Auditory: “By the fire at my right hand”

Visualization: Imagine a ray of light shooting out from the sphere of light at 
your
solar plexus into infinite distance to the right.


The Elemental Cross, Step 5

Movement: Druid repeats the same gesture with the left hand, so that both arms 
now
slope down and outward from the shoulders, turning the head and facing left.

Auditory: “By waters at my left hand”

Visualization: Imagine a ray of light shooting out from the sphere of light at 
the solar
plexus into infinite distance to the left.


The Elemental Cross, Step 6

Movement: Druid crosses arms across chest, right over left, turning the head and
facing forward.

Auditory: “May the powers of Nature bless and protect me/this grove, this day 
and
always.”

Visualization: Imagine twin rays of light shooting out from the sphere of light 
at the
solar plexus, in front and behind him/her, into infinite distance (for all of 
the rays, see
graphic below).1

1     If the elemental cross is being performed without the rest of the SOP, 
the druid
would circulate light around him/herself at this point.  This is described in 
more detail
in the Druidry Handbook and on page 71 of this guide.


The Elemental Cross, Step 7

Movement: Druid lowers both arms while chanting.

Auditory: “Ah-Oh-En.”

Visualization:  None.

Pause before beginning the calling of the elements


Part II: The Calling of the Elements

Please note, that each of these calls has multiple steps. You will notice, 
however,
that the patterns replicate and are quite similar for each of the four 
elements. Once
you have learned the first pattern, the remaining elements are more simple to 
enact.

We have provided visualizations, however, for calling of the elements, you may
choose instead to simply observe the elements around you (which is particularly
useful if you are near a window and/or in a natural setting). This is highly en-
couraged as part of your regular Druid practice.

In all of the symbols below, the symbol is typically traced with visualization 
and
then the words are spoken.


Calling of Air

First Movement: Druid faces East
or goes to the eastern quarter of the
Grove. Druid traces the symbol of
the element of Air in front of him/
her.

First Visualization: Imagine the
air symbol drawn in bright yellow
light and the circle filled with a
paler and transparent yellow.

First Auditory: “By the yellow
gate of the rushing winds, the
birch of new beginnings, and
the hawk of May in the heights
of morning, I call upon the Air.
(Pause) May I receive the bless-
ings of Air this day.”

Second Visualization:  Imag-
ine a scene beyond the symbol corresponding to the symbolism of the east—for
example, a spring meadow at daybreak with the Sun rising, a fresh wind blowing
toward you with the scent of grass and flowers, great billowing clouds in the 
dis-
tance with their edges turned golden by the Sun’s rays, etc.

Second Auditory: “I thank the Air for its gifts.”


Banishing of Air

Movement: Druid traces the air
symbol again, but the circle now
counterclockwise from the upper-
most point, then draws the line
upwards.

Auditory: “And with the help of
the powers of Air, I banish from
within and around me all harm-
ful and disturbing influences and
every imbalance of the nature of
Air.   I banish these things far from
this place.”

Visualization: Druid imagines all
unbalanced manifestations and
influences blowing with the wind
and dissolving like mist on the
vastness of Air.


Calling of Fire

First Movement: Druid faces
South or goes to the southern
quarter of the Grove. Druid traces
the symbol of the element of Fire
in front of him/her.

First Visualization: Druid imag-
ines the symbol drawn in bright
red light and filled with a paler
and transparent red.

First Auditory: By the red gate of
the bright flames, the fire of the
cedar, and the white stag of the
summer greenwood, I call upon
the fire. (Pause) May I receive the
blessings of fire this day.”

Second Visualization: Imagine
a scene beyond the symbol cor-

responding to the symbolism of the south—for example, a desert like those in the
American southwest at noon on a summer’s day, with red rock mesas in the middle
distance and reddish sand close by, the sun blazing down overhead, the heat 
making
the air shimmer and radiating toward you; a sweltering summer day, and so on.

Second Auditory:  “I thank the Fire for its gifts”


Banishing of Fire

Movement: Druid traces the
same symbol again, but the
triangle now faces counterclock-
wise from the uppermost point.

Auditory: “And with the help of
the powers of Fire, I banish from
within and around me all harm-
ful and disturbing influences and
every imbalance of the nature of
Fire.  I banish these things far
from this place.”

Visualization: Druid imagines
all unbalanced manifestations
and influences burning in the
bonfire and turning into fine ash.


Calling of Water

First Movement: Druid faces West
or goes to the western quarter of the
Grove. Druid traces the symbol of
the element of water in front of him/
her.

First Visualization: Druid imag-
ines the symbol drawn in blue light
with a paler and transparent blue.

First Auditory: “By the blue gate
of the of the mighty waters, the
hawthorn that stands between the
worlds, and the salmon of wisdom
in the sacred pool, I call upon the
Water.

(Pause) May I receive the blessings
of Water this day.”

Second Visualization: Imagine a scene beyond the symbol corresponding to the
symbolism of the west—for example, an ocean beach at sunset on an autumn day,
with great waves rolling toward you from out of the distance, rain falling from
clouds overhead, the setting sun just visible on the horizon through a gap in 
the

clouds and its rays making the clouds and sea glow, and so on.

Second Auditory:  “I thank the Water for its gifts.”


Banishing of Water

Movement: Druid traces the same
symbol again, but the triangle now
counterclockwise from the upper-
most point.

Auditory: “And with the help of
the powers of water, I banish from
within and around me all harmful
and disturbing influences and every
imbalance of the nature of water.  I
banish these things far from this
place.”

Visualization: While saying these
words, Druid imagines all unbal-
anced manifestations being washed
away by rain or waves of water.


Calling of Earth

First Movement: Druid faces North
or goes to the northern quarter of the
Grove. Druid traces the symbol of the
element of earth in front of him/her.

First Visualization: Druid imagines
the earth symbol drawn in green light
and the circle filled with a paler and
transparent green.

First Auditory: “By the green gate of
the of the tall stones, the fruit of the
apple tree, and the great bear of the
starry heavens, I call upon the Earth.
(Pause) May I receive the blessings of
Earth this day.”

Second Visualization: Imagine a scene
beyond the symbol corresponding to the symbolism of the north—for example, a 
for-
est scene at midnight in winter, with snow on the ground and the trees, the 
moon and
stars shining brilliantly in a clear night sky, distant mountains beyond them 
with their
peaks illuminated by the moonlight, and so on.

Second Auditory:  “I thank the Earth for its gifts.”


Banishing of Earth

Movement: Druid traces the same
symbol again, but the circle now is
traced counterclockwise from the
lowest point.

Auditory: “And with the help of
the powers of Earth, I banish from
within and around me all harmful
and disturbing influences and every
imbalance of the nature of Earth.

I banish these things far from this
place.”

Visualization: While saying these
words, Druid imagines all unbalanced
manifestations dissolving and perco-
lating     down through the soil, absorbed
by earth and stone.

Second Auditory: “I thank the Earth for its gifts.”


Calling the Telluric, Solar, and Lunar Currents

Calling the Telluric Current/Spirit Below

Movement: Druid faces East or
goes to the north side of the altar
facing South.

Druid traces the symbol of Spirit
Below down and in front of him/
her as if over an altar, a circle
clockwise from the lowermost
point.

First Visualization: Imagine the
symbol drawn in bright orange light
filled with a paler and transparent
orange.

First Auditory: “By the orange
gate of the land beneath this grove,
the deep-rooted oak tree, and the
great soil web of life, I call upon

Spirit Below.” (Pause). “May the telluric current rise and bless me/this grove 
with
the blessing and power of the Earth.”

Second Visualization: Imagine the soil and stone beneath you, reaching down
all the way to the green fire at the Earth’s heart. Feel its stability, its 
richness, its
immense power, and so on.

Second Auditory: “I thank the Spirit Below for its gifts.”


Calling the Solar Current/Spirit Above

Movement: Druid traces the
symbol of Spirit Above, a circle
clockwise from the uppermost
point.

First Visual: Imagine the symbol
drawn in bright violet light and
filled with a paler and transparent
violet.

First Auditory: “By the purple
gate of the skies above, the hem-
lock [or other tall, dominant tree],
and the Sun in its glory, I call
upon Spirit Above. (Pause). May
the solar current descend and bless
me/this grove with the blessing
and power of the earth.”

Second Visual: Imagine the

heavens above you, luminous with stars and galaxies, extending up beyond the
reach of your mind’s eye. The Sun shines in the midst of all, directly above 
your
head.  Feel the beauty, silence, and vastness of the cosmos, and so on.

Second Auditory: “I thank the Spirit Above for its gifts.


Invoking the Lunar Current

First visualization: Druid becomes
aware of the six powers already
invoked, in the six directions sur-
rounding him/her.

Auditory: “By the six powers here
invoked and here present, and

by the grand word by which the
worlds were made—

AWEN (chanting this word Ah-
Oh-En, stretching out the vowels)

—I invoke Spirit Within. May a ray
of the lunar current bless and pro-
tect this Grove, and further its work.

(If there is an altar, touch it with
your right hand.)

May it establish a sphere of protection around this Grove and all within it.”


Creating the Sphere of Light

The final phase of the ritual uses
words and gestures only at its co-
nclusion.  The rest of the work is
done solely by the imagination
(visualization). Please note that
this visualization will take some
practice for some to achieve.

First Visualization

First Visualization: Imagine
the solar and telluric currents
coming into contact in front of
you  (or on top of the grove altar)
and forming a sphere of brilliant
white light.


Second Visualization

Second Visualization: See the
colored light from each of the
six directions radiating into the
larger sphere of white light, so
that it shimmers with rainbow
colors.


Third Visualization

Third Visualization: Next, imag-
ine the sphere of light expanding
outward until it surrounds you
(or    your sacred grove). Take your
time at this visualization, and
build up the image as strongly
and solidly as you are able. Con-
centrate on the idea that the
sphere forms a barrier impene-
trable to any hostile or harmful
influence, a protective wall.

Movement: When you have
established the sphere as firmly
as          you can, cross your arms across
your chest.

Auditory: “I thank the powers for
their blessings.”

Then proceed to the ceremony, or if the Sphere of Protection is being practiced 
by it-
self, pause for a few minutes, feeling the energies you have invoked, and then 
release
the imagery from your mind.


Adapting the SOP

We encourage each AODA Candidate to adapt the Sphere of Protection to his
or her own personal cosmology and druid practice.  The above Sphere of 
Protection,
with its emphasis on the animals traditional to the Druid revival and the trees 
of North
America, offers only one of countless possibilities. Members of our order have 
used the
SOP  in ways befitting of their own diverse practices—once you’ve learned the 
basic
pattern, feel free to experiment and adapt as you grow as a Druid.

While it is possible for an individual Druid to changing the directions of the
SOP to align with another directional system, please note that changing these 
direc-
tions may also require changes to other aspects of AODA ritual and ceremony, so 
this
decision should be made purposefully and carefully. The invocation of the 
telluric, solar,
and lunar currents should not be changed. The three currents are the main 
sources
of power in AODA grove ritual, and the Sphere of Protection ritual is the way 
these
powers are called into the grove and linked to its symbolism and core 
practices.

You may find that certain parts of this ritual may not work for you due to a
disability or different way of working or seeing the world. We encourage you to 
adapt
this ritual as needed, given your unique circumstances. For example, if you are 
not able
to stand or move arms easily, remove or modify the movements of the ritual. If 
you are
not able to easily visualize, go perform the ritual outside and observe the 
air, fire, water,
and earth as you perform it (this is an excellent practice for all Druids).  If 
you have
dyslexia and /or find difficulty in keeping the directions straight, create 
small signs to
place where you do the ritual so that you will remember the directions.


Chapter 8: Bardic, Ovate,
and Druid Studies

As noted in chapter 3, the work of our Order has three branches, reflecting the
threefold division of the ancient Celtic Druids. Our work is not the same as 
that of
the ancient Druids, though; we are of a different time and place, with other 
challenges
and needs that are of our time. Therefore, the work of Ovates, Bards, and 
Druids in
the AODA is designed to meet the needs and challenges of our world.

Ovates were once those who saw beyond the surface of things: seers, diviners,
healers. In our time, we also need those who see and understand beyond our human
needs to appreciate and understand the natural world. Ovate work in the AODA
engages with the natural and earth sciences, so that we better understand the 
world
that we revere and the systems of the earth that we seek to strengthen. An 
ovate study
or exploration could include the study and understanding of plants (botany), 
animals
(zoology), insects (entomology), or fungi (mycology). It could be the study of 
the stones
and  their origins (geology and vulcanology), the waters (hydrology, 
oceanography, and
so on), or the air and atmosphere (meteorology or climatology). Each of these 
studies
is a part of the great study of ecology: the study of whole systems in the 
living world,
including the ways in which living things relate to one another and their 
environment.

Some have asked why practices like permaculture, medical herbalism, com-
posting, and green construction are not eligible as ovate explorations. While 
they are
certainly worthwhile pursuits, they place human experience, activity, or need 
at the
center of their work. Ovate study is meant to help take us beyond ourselves, to 
no longer
place us at the center of our learning. Ovate study is a corrective for the 
humanocentric
world in which we are embedded. Practices that look at how humans engage with 
the
natural world are certainly appropriate for Earth Path changes, but in the 1st 
and 2nd
Degrees they are not appropriate for ovate exploration. There are opportunities 
later
in the AODA’s curriculum for such human-nature connected explorations.


Bards were once those who created the words and sounds that carried meaning to
those who would listen: poets, musicians, storytellers. These skills and 
talents are still
necessary in this world, as are so many others in the realm of arts and crafts. 
Bardic
work in the AODA is about creative and skilled expression, rather than mass 
produc-
tion. Work in the fine arts (painting, sculpture, drawing, photography, and so 
on), the
performing arts (music, dance, theatre, storytelling, and so on), and the 
literary arts
(poetry, prose, songwriting, and so on) are all appropriate avenues of bardic 
explora-
tion. Work in craft and artisan practices are also appropriate explorations, 
including
fiber arts, metalwork and smithing, glasswork, pottery, landscape and garden 
design,
woodworking, bookbinding, and the culinary arts.

Essential to the bardic path is the work of creative expression: making basic
iron tools as an experienced blacksmith does not meet the criterion, but making 
a set
of fireplace irons with decorative finials that hold symbolic meaning does. 
Writing a
technical manual for one’s work is unlikely to satisfy the bardic exploration, 
but writing
a memoir or poetic exploration of the experience of working, including what it 
felt
like and what it meant to do that work, likely will. The practice of a martial 
art is not
inherently bardic, but were the practice to become a performance that included 
a cre-
ative component that communicated something about the experience or the practice
to an audience, it might suffice. That said, learning a new art or craft 
(regardless of the
“artistic merit” of the end product or your degree of skill at the end of the 
study) is an
appropriate 1st Degree exploration.

Druids were once those who worked with the skills of the mind: philosophy, 
schol-
arship, and teaching. These skills are taught in many places in our world, but 
have
often come to exclude the more inward, mystic, and transcendent aspects of our 
con-
sciousness such as religious practice, spirituality, and esotericism. Druid 
study in the
AODA includes the knowledge and practices that engage with these experiences.
Druid explorations may focus on religious practice or spiritual disciplines, 
including
prayer, acts of devotion, maintaining an altar or sacred space, and rites of 
worship or
spiritual well-being. Druid explorations may focus on knowledge and wisdom, 
such as
the study of Druid philosophy and cosmology, mythological understanding, Ogham
knowledge, Druid triads, and practices of thinking, memory, and meditation. 
Finally,
Druid explorations may focus on the esoteric arts and sciences, including 
energy work,
divination, and magic.


Simply attending a worship service or watching others perform a ritual is insuf-
ficient to meet the needs of Druid exploration. You are meant to be a 
participant, not an
observer, in this work. Learning and committing to a spiritual discipline or 
practice is one
possibility. Study that increases your knowledge in the areas of the Druid 
branch and then
applies  it to your Druidry and whole life is appropriate; study that addresses 
other forms
of knowledge without clear connection to this branch will not work. The Druid 
study is
intended to help shift your awareness to include the inward, mystic, and 
transcendent;
only study that addresses those aspects of our beings will be eligible for this 
exploration.

At times, it can be tricky to figure out where a particular exploration might
fit into the branches. A topic or program might fit into multiple branches. The 
key
is to determine which branch is most predominant in the study you will 
undertake.
It might be as simple as making a choice about emphasis, or it might require 
more
consideration to find the core nature of the project. For example:

•      Creating liturgy/ritual scripts could be either a Druid or a Bardic 
study. If the
emphasis were to be placed on understanding the ritual process and the con-
nections of the practitioner to the object/subject of the ritual, that would be 
a
Druid study. If the emphasis were placed on the crafting of the words, the 
tools,
and the performance techniques that would be included in the rite, it would be
appropriate as a Bardic study.

•      Studying climate and weather patterns in your area is easily seen as an 
Ovate
study; however, if one were to do this in the context of connections to sky or
weather deities and weather magic this would fit as a Druid study.

•      Observing and describing systems of ecology could again easily be 
understood
as an Ovate study. It could also become a Bardic study if the descriptions were
to be written as a series of poems, played as pieces of music, created as 
visual art
like paintings or photographs, spoken in storytelling performance, or 
represented
through other arts and crafts.

•      Some fields of study, like landscape design, could engage with all three 
branches.
As an Ovate study, one might examine the water, wind, and animal movement
patterns in an area before planning changes to the land in order to make best
use   of what natural patterns exist. As a Druid study, one might examine the
energetics and sense of sacredness in the land before planning changes in order
to   create or preserve sacred spaces in the landscape. As a Bardic study, one 
might
look at the aesthetics of the area, choosing plants, pathways, and methods of
design to heighten its beauty, express an emotion, or tell a story.


As you consider what explorations, studies, and projects you might undertake,
use this framework of the branches of study to understand where your interests
might fall within our Druidry. Is what you are considering scientific and 
ecological,
creative and skillful, or spiritual and scholarly? Do you need to have an 
emphasis
on       a particular aspect of a study in order to place it well within the 
three branches?
When you inform the Grand Grove of your study plans, the Archdruids will approve
or discuss your explorations with you should they not quite fit into our 
framework.
The better you understand these three branches of work in our AODA Druidry,
the more likely you are to find your explorations easy to create and satisfying 
to
complete!


Appendices
Appendix A: Sphere of

Protection: Sample Ritual

Preparation

As one of the core rituals of AODA’s curriculum, the Sphere of Protection is
a good example of the inherent flexibility of Druidical practice, since it 
requires inner
search and personal input before it can even be performed for the first time. 
This ver-
sion differs from others found in the Order’s materials, and it should be 
considered a
starting point for the long process of learning and adjusting it to your own 
path, not
as something to be taken to the letter.

This means that the names of spiritual powers and the symbolism corresponding
to the directions and elements that are given here are traditional but can, and 
should,
be adapted to your own experiences, beliefs, and values.

Note that italics are directions (something to do), while words in normal text
are spoken.

The Elemental Cross

(When performing the ritual as a daily practice, Druid starts facing East, but 
if it’s part
of a Grove Ritual, starts at the north side of the altar facing South.)

(Druid imagines the Sun standing at zenith high above his/her head, and an 
equivalent
sphere of silver-green fire, the heart of the Earth, far away below his/her 
feet.)

(Druid brings both arms up from the sides in an arc, palms join above the head 
before
drawing them down together to touch the point between the eyebrows, while 
imagining a


ray of light descending from the Sun with the movement to form a sphere of 
golden light
within his/her head.)

(Druid pauses and says) Hu the Mighty, Great Druid God.

(Druid draws the joined palms down to touch the point of the solar plexus, 
while imag-
ining the ray of light descending as well and forming a second sphere of golden 
light at the
solar plexus, then continuing through and beyond him/her until it reaches the 
sphere of fire
at the heart of the Earth.)

Hesus of the Oaks, Chief of Tree-Spirits.

(Druid leaves left hand where it is and pivots right arm outwards at the elbow, 
so that the
right arm ends up angling down and outwards in a straight line from the 
shoulder, turning
the head and facing right, while imagining a ray of light shooting out from the 
sphere of
light at your solar plexus into infinite distance to the right)

Ceridwen the Wise, Keeper of the Cauldron.

(Druid repeats the same gesture with the left hand, so that both arms now slope 
down
and outward from the shoulders, turning the head and facing left, while 
imagining a ray
of light shooting out from the sphere of light at the solar plexus into 
infinite distance to
the left.)

Niwalen of the Flowers, Child of Spring.

(Druid crosses arms across chest, right over left, turning the head and facing 
forward,
while imagining twin rays of light shooting out from the sphere of light at the 
solar plexus,
in front and behind him/her, into infinite distance.)

May the powers of Nature bless and protect me/this grove, this day and always.
(Druid lowers both arms while chanting with the syllables drawn out, Ah-Oh-En)
AWEN.


The Circulation of Light

(Druid faces East or goes to the north side of the altar facing South.)

(Druid brings awareness to the sphere of golden light at the solar plexus, 
imagining it
expanding and surrounding him/her or the whole grove completely with the solar 
plexus at
its center, concentrating firmly for a few moments on the idea that no unwanted 
or harmful
influences can pass through the light.)

(Druid focuses on the sphere’s right/left axis, imagining it spinning over the 
head and
down in front, under the feet and up the back, slowly at first, but faster with 
each passing
breath until it’s a blur of speed.)

(Druid focuses on the sphere’s up/down axis, adding a second spinning to the 
first, from left
to right in front, and from right to left behind, slowly at first, but faster 
with each passing
breath until it’s a blur of speed.)

(Druid focuses on the sphere’s front/back axis, adding a third spinning to the 
others, from
up down to the right, under the feet and up the left, slowly at first, but 
faster with each
passing breath until it’s a blur of speed.)

(Druid imagines the sphere spinning in all three directions at the same time, 
faster and
faster until it reaches infinite speed and remains perfectly still, 
concentrating on this stillness
for a few moments.)

(Druid crosses arms across chest, right over left) I thank the powers of Nature 
for their
blessings and protection.

(Druid lowers arms and pauses for a few minutes feeling the energies invoked, 
then
releasing the imagery from his/her mind.)

The Calling of the Elements
Air

(Druid faces East or goes to the eastern quarter of the Grove.)

(Druid traces the symbol of the element of Air in front of him/her, a circle 
clockwise from
the uppermost point, then adding a line straight upwards from this same point, 
imagining


it drawn in bright yellow light and the circle filled with a paler and 
transparent yellow.)

By the yellow gate of the rushing winds and the hawk of May in the heights of
morning, I invoke the Air, its gods, spirits, and powers.

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) May I receive the blessings of Air this 
day.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) May the powers of Air bless and protect this 
Grove and
all within it, and grant their aid to its work.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines the sun rising in the horizon of the 
land
where he/she lives, how the morning air feels and smells, the sounds of the day 
as it
awakens.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments, then says) I thank the 
Air for its
gifts.

(Druid traces the same symbol again, but the circle now counterclockwise from 
the upper-
most point, then draws the line upwards.)

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) And with the help of the powers of Air, I 
banish from
within and around me all unbalanced manifestations of Air. I banish them far 
away from me.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) And with the help of the powers of Air, I banish 
from
within and around this Grove every influence that might hinder its work. I 
banish all
such influences far away.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines all unbalanced manifestations and 
influences
blowing with the wind and dissolving like mist on the vastness of Air.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments.)

Fire

(Druid faces South or goes to the southern quarter of the Grove.)

(Druid traces the symbol of the element of Fire in front of him/her, an 
equilateral triangle,
point up, clockwise from the uppermost point, imagining it drawn in bright red 
light and
filled with a paler and transparent red.)


By the red gate of the bright flames and the white stag of the summer greenwood,
I invoke the Fire, its gods, spirits, and powers.

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) May I receive the blessings of Fire this 
day.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) May the powers of Fire bless and protect this 
Grove
and all within it, and grant their aid to its work.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines a bonfire in front of him/her, the 
brightness
of its flames and the smell of its smoke, on the hottest day in his/her 
memory.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments, then says) I thank the 
Fire for its gifts.

(Druid traces the same symbol again, but the triangle now counterclockwise from 
the
uppermost point.)

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) And with the help of the powers of Fire, 
I banish
from within and around me all unbalanced manifestations of Fire. I banish them 
far
away from me.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) And with the help of the powers of Fire, I 
banish from
within and around this Grove every influence that might hinder its work. I 
banish all
such influences far away.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines all unbalanced manifestations and 
influences
burning in the bonfire and turning into fine ash.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments.)

Water

(Druid faces West or goes to the western quarter of the Grove.)

(Druid traces the symbol of the element of Water in front of him/her, an 
equilateral triangle,
point down, clockwise from the lowermost point, imagining it drawn in bright 
blue light
and filled with a paler and transparent blue.)


By the blue gate of the mighty waters and the salmon of wisdom in the sacred 
pool,
I invoke the Water, its gods, spirits, and powers.

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) May I receive the blessings of Water this 
day.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) May the powers of Water bless and protect this 
Grove
and all within it, and grant their aid to its work.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines the largest body of water on the land 
where
he/she lives, how it smells and how it feels to be near it.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments, then says) I thank the 
Water for its gifts.

(Druid traces the same symbol again, but the triangle now counterclockwise from 
the
lowermost point.)

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) And with the help of the powers of Water, 
I banish
from within and around me all unbalanced manifestations of Water. I banish them
far away from me.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) And with the help of the powers of Water, I 
banish from
within and around this Grove every influence that might hinder its work. I 
banish all
such influences far away.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines all unbalanced manifestations and 
influences
dragged away and drowned in the depths of Water.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments.)

Earth

(Druid faces North or goes to the northern quarter of the Grove.)

(Druid traces the symbol of the element of Earth in front of him/her, a circle 
clockwise
from the lowermost point, then adding a line straight downwards from this same 
point,
imagining it drawn in bright green light and the circle filled with a paler and 
transparent
green.)


By the green gate of the tall stones and the great bear of the starry heavens, 
I invoke
the Earth, its gods, spirits, and powers.

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) May I receive the blessings of Earth this 
day.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) May the powers of Earth bless and protect this 
Grove
and all within it, and grant their aid to its work.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines the land itself in which he/she 
lives, with
whatever vegetation thrives there growing on it.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments, then says) I thank the 
Earth for its gifts.

(Druid traces the same symbol again, but the circle now counterclockwise from 
the lower-
most point, then draws the line downwards.)

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) And with the help of the powers of Earth, 
I banish
from within and around me all unbalanced manifestations of Earth. I banish them
far away from me.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) And with the help of the powers of Earth, I 
banish from
within and around this Grove every influence that might hinder its work. I 
banish all
such influences far away.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines all unbalanced manifestations and 
influences
dissolving and percolating down through the soil, absorbed by earth and stone.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments.)

Spirit Below

(Druid faces East or goes to the north side of the altar facing South.)

(Druid traces the symbol of Spirit Below down and in front of him/her as if 
over an altar,
a circle clockwise from the lowermost point, imagining it drawn in bright 
orange light filled
with a paler and transparent orange.)


By the orange gate of the land beneath and the bright heart of the Earth Mother,
I invoke the Spirit Below, its gods, spirits, and powers.

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) May I receive the blessings of Spirit 
Below this day.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) May the powers of Spirit Below bless and protect 
this
Grove and all within it, and grant their aid to its work.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines a realm deeper than earth and stone, 
where
dwells the immense power that drives earthquakes and volcanoes, that moves 
continents
across the face of the planet, a power that also flows through every living 
thing.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments, then says) I thank Spirit 
Below
for its gifts.

Spirit Above

(Druid traces the symbol of Spirit Above up and in front of him/her, a circle 
clockwise
from the uppermost point, imagining it drawn in bright violet light and filled 
with a paler
and transparent violet.)

By the purple gate of the skies above and the Sun in its glory, the father of 
light, I
invoke the Spirit Above, its gods, spirits, and powers.

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) May I receive the blessings of Spirit 
Above this day.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) May the powers of Spirit Above bless and protect 
this
Grove and all within it, and grant their aid to its work.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines the Sun in midheaven shinning upon the
planets on their orbits, surrounded by the vastness of space with its 
numberless stars, all of
it guided by the perfect order that sets the worlds in their courses.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments, then says) I thank the 
Spirit
Above for its gifts.


Spirit Within

(Druid becomes aware of the six powers already invoked, feels that he/she is 
standing in
a place of perfect balance among them.)

By the six powers here invoked and here present, and by the grand word by which
the worlds were made —

(Druid chants this word as before, Ah-Oh-En) AWEN

—I invoke the Spirit Within.

(If Druid is in daily practice, says) May the universe within me and the 
universe
around me be in harmony.

(If Druid is in a Grove, says) May the powers of Spirit Within bless and 
protect this
Grove and all within it, and grant their aid to its work.

(While saying these words, Druid imagines him/herself, exactly as he/she is, 
every aspect
as a vessel of infinite powers, a pattern in the great flow of the universe.)

(Druid concentrates firmly on this for a few moments, then says) I thank the 
powers for
their gifts).


Appendix B: Solitary Grove
Opening and Closing

Altar Setup: Before beginning a ceremony, put the altar cloth and any 
decorations on the
altar that you wish, and arrange the four cauldrons representing the four 
elements. Earth
will be in the north (sand, salt, or soil); Air in the east (incense, or if 
that’s not possible, a
bowl with a feather); Fire in the south (a candle); and Water in the west (a 
bowl of water).

To Begin the Ceremony: Light the incense and the candle, and then go to the 
edge of the
area where you’ll be performing the ceremony. Take a few moments to clear your 
mind of
unrelated thoughts and feelings.

Grove Opening

Entering the Grove: Then, when you are ready to begin, enter the circle through 
the eastern
gate (or whichever your degree entitles you to use), then go around to the 
north side of the
altar, where you face south. Raise your right hand palm forward to salute the 
Spiritual Sun,
which is always symbolically at high noon in the southern sky, and say:)

Let the powers be attentive as I am about to open a Grove of Druids in this 
place.

Declaring Peace:

The first duty of Druids assembled in the Sacred Grove is to proclaim peace to 
the
four quarters of the world, for without peace our work cannot proceed.1

1    The most traditional version of this ceremony uses a grove sword as 
follows: When Proclaim-
ing Peace at the start of the solitary grove opening, take the sword from its 
place, still sheathed,
and circle around to the east. Face outward and raise the sword in its sheath, 
holding it horizontal-
ly at head level, right hand on hilt, left on sheath.  Draw the sword partway 
from the sheath so that
half the blade is visible, then push the sword back into the sheath at each of 
the quarters and say, “I
proclaim peace in the east/west/south/north” and then sheath the sword. Move to 
the next quarter,


(Raise your hand in the east, facing outward toward the east and say):

I proclaim peace in the east.

(Pause, feeling peace radiating within and without.  Lower your hand and 
proceed to
the south, where you repeat the same process, saying:)

I proclaim peace in the south.

(Proceed to the west, and do the same thing, saying:)

I proclaim peace in the west.

(Proceed to the north and do the same thing, saying:)

I proclaim peace in the north.

(Advance to the north side of the altar, facing south across it.  Say:)

The four quarters are at peace and the work of the grove may proceed.

Purifying the Grove with the Elements

Let this grove and all within it be purified with air.

(Go to the eastern side of the altar, pick up the cauldron with the incense, 
and carry it to
the eastern edge of the space.  Pause there, holding the cauldron out as though 
offering the
incense, and then walk in a clockwise circle once around the outer edge of the 
space, tracing a
circle around the grove with the cauldron. When you’ve come back around to the 
east, return
the cauldron to the altar.)

(While you do this, visualize the following. When you hold the cauldron as 
though offer-
ing the incense, imagine a current of yellow light streaming in from the east 
and forming
a sphere of yellow light around the cauldron.  As you carry the cauldron around 
the grove,
imagine the cauldron tracing a line of yellow light in a circle around the 
outside of the grove.
When you carry the cauldron back to the altar, see it trace a line of yellow 
light in from the
edge to the altar, and see the sphere of yellow light remaining with the 
cauldron on the altar.

(When you have finished, say:)

unsheathe partway, speak the words, and sheath again.


Let this Grove and all within it be purified with fire.

(Go to the southern side of the altar, pick up the cauldron with the flame, and 
carry it to
the southern edge of the space.  Pause there, holding the cauldron out as 
though offering the
flame, and then walk in a clockwise circle once around the outer edge of the 
space, tracing
a circle around the grove with the cauldron.  When you’ve come back around to 
the south,
return the cauldron to the altar.)

(While you do this, visualize the following. When you hold the cauldron as 
though offering
the fire, imagine a current of red light streaming in from the south and 
forming a sphere
of red light around the cauldron.  As you carry the cauldron around the grove, 
imagine the
cauldron tracing a line of red light in a circle around the outside of the 
grove. When you carry
the cauldron back to the altar, see it trace a line of red light in from the 
edge to the altar, and
see the sphere of red light remaining with the cauldron on the altar.)

(When you have finished, say:)

Let this Grove and all within it be purified with water.

(Go to the western side of the altar, pick up the cauldron with the water, and 
carry it to
the western edge of the space.  Pause there, holding the cauldron out as though 
offering the
water, and then walk in a clockwise circle once around the outer edge of the 
space, tracing a
circle around the grove with the cauldron. When you’ve come back around to the 
west, return
the cauldron to the altar.)

(While you do this, visualize the following. When you hold the cauldron as 
though offering
the water, imagine a current of blue light streaming in from the west and 
forming a sphere
of blue light around the cauldron.  As you carry the cauldron around the grove, 
imagine the
cauldron tracing a line of blue light in a circle around the outside of the 
grove. When you
carry the cauldron back to the altar, see it trace a line of blue light in from 
the edge to the
altar, and see the sphere of blue light remaining with the cauldron on the 
altar.)

(When you have finished, say:)

Let this Grove and all within it be purified with earth.

(Go to the northern side of the altar, pick up the cauldron with the salt, and 
carry it to the
northern edge of the space.  Pause there, holding the cauldron out as though 
offering the salt,


and then walk in a clockwise circle once around the outer edge of the space, 
tracing a circle
around the grove with the cauldron from north to north.  When you’ve come back 
around to
the north, return the cauldron to the altar.)

(While you do this, visualize the following. When you hold the cauldron as 
though
offering the salt, imagine a current of green light streaming in from the north 
and forming
a sphere of green light around the cauldron.  As you carry the cauldron around 
the grove,
imagine the cauldron tracing a line of green light in a circle around the 
outside of the
grove. When you carry the cauldron back to the altar, see it trace a line of 
green light in
from the edge to the altar, and see the sphere of green light remaining with 
the cauldron
on the altar.)

(When you have finished, say:)

Invoking the Holy Powers

I invoke the blessing of the holy powers with the words that have been the bond
among all Druids:

Grant, O holy ones, thy protection;
And in protection, strength;

And in strength, understanding;
And in understanding, knowledge;

And in knowledge, the knowledge of justice;
And in the knowledge of justice, the love of it;
And in that love, the love of all existences;

And in the love of all existences, the love of Earth our mother and all 
goodness.

(When you’ve finished the prayer, chant the word Awen three times; with each 
chant intone
it. Draw the word out into its three syllables – Ah-Oh-En – and let it resonate 
throughout
your body and the Grove.

AWEN, AWEN, AWEN

Then perform the complete Sphere of Protection ceremony to complete the opening 
of the
grove.When this is finished go to the chair in the north and take your seat. 
This completes the
opening ceremony.


Solitary Grove Closing

(When the work of the Grove is completed, sit down in the chair in the north 
and let your
mind return to stillness.  When you’re ready, rise and go to the north side of 
the altar, facing
south across it.) Say:

Let the powers be attentive as I am about to close a grove of Druids in this 
place.

(Go to the eastern side of the altar.  Take the cauldron with the incense to 
the east, and
hold it outward as though offering the incense, as in the opening. Say:)

Releasing the Elements

With thanks I release the powers of air to their rightful places. May peace 
prevail
in the east.

(As you say this, imagine the yellow light that surrounds the cauldron flowing 
back to its
sources in the east.  When this is finished, return the cauldron to its place 
on the altar, and
go to the southern side of the altar.  Take the cauldron with the flame to the 
south, and hold
it outward as though offering the flame, as in the opening. Say:)

With thanks I release the powers of fire to their rightful places. May peace 
prevail
in the south.

(As you say this, imagine the red light that surrounds the cauldron flowing 
back to its
sources in the south.  When this is finished, return the cauldron to its place 
on the altar, and
go  to the western side of the altar.  Take the cauldron with the water to the 
west, and hold
it outward as though offering the water, as in the opening. Say:)

With thanks I release the powers of water to their rightful places. May peace 
prevail
in the west.

(As you say this, imagine the blue light that surrounds the cauldron flowing 
back to its
sources in the west.  When this is finished, return the cauldron to its place 
on the altar, and
go  to the northern side of the altar. Take the cauldron with the salt to the 
north, and hold it
outward as though offering the salt, as in the opening. Say:)

With thanks I release the powers of earth to their rightful places. May peace 
prevail
in the north.


(As you say this, imagine the green light that surrounds the cauldron flowing 
back to its
sources in the north.  When this is finished, return the cauldron to its place 
on the altar, and
remain at the northern side of the altar, facing south. Say:)

Peace prevails in the four quarters and throughout the grove.

Returning Power to the Land

Let any power remaining from this working be returned to the Earth for her 
blessing.

(Any grove working leaves some energy behind it, and this can usually be sensed 
as a mood, a
feeling, or a subtle sense of presence in the space. Imagine this flowing 
inward toward the altar,
down through it to the earth, and then down to the earth’s center. Keep 
concentrating on this until
the grove space feels clear of any leftover energy and you feel that this work 
is done. Then say:)

Invoking the Sword of  Swords

I now invoke the Sword of Swords.

(If you have a sword, draw it and hold it high with the hilt up and the point 
down. If
you don’t have one, visualize a great medieval sword in that position, hovering 
in the air
before you, and raise your hand in salute.  Say the following incantation:)

From the rising Sun, three rays of light;

From the living Earth, three stones of witness;

From the eye and the mind and the hand of wisdom, three rowan
staves of all knowledge.

From the fire of the Sun, the forge;
From the bones of the Earth, the steel;
From the hand of the wise, the making:

From these, Excalibur.

By the Sword of Swords, I pledge my faithful service to the living Earth, our 
home
and mother.

(Chant the word Awen once:)

AWEN.

(As you chant the word, imagine the sword—whether physical or 
imagined—dissolving
into pure light, which draws together into the image of the Sun, standing at 
the zenith in


the south. Lower the sword, sheath it, and put it back in its place, or lower 
your hand, and
leave the altar; walk in a clockwise circle around the grove to whichever gate 
your degree
entitles you to use, and exit the grove.  This concludes the closing ceremony.)


Appendix C: Seasonal Ceremonies

The seasonal ceremonies form the core of our holy day work. These are the
standard seasonal ceremonies given to AODA members for their use during the Can-
didate year; however, when you are comfortable (or as they are working on the 
Second
Degree, whichever comes first) we encourage you to adapt and write your own 
seasonal
ceremonies befitting their individual druid paths. However, these rituals 
represent our
common liturgical format.

The seasonal ceremonies of the AODA are, primarily, ceremonies of blessing
and healing both to the celebrants and to the broader earth.  By invoking the 
three
currents, and by channeling the solar current down into the telluric current 
(which is
what these three ceremonies essentially do), we are working powerful blessings 
upon
our lands each time these ceremonies take place.

These ceremonies are written for one person, but can easily be adapted for
several people. If you have a larger group, you will want to instead use the 
ceremonies
in The Druid Grove Handbook which are designed for seven positions.

Please note that we have included both the traditional and modern Welsh names 
for the
ceremonies in the druid tradition.


Spring Equinox Ceremony
(Solitary): The Ritual of
Alban Eilir/Eliler

Altar Materials: Usual AODA materials (white altar cloth, four cauldrons rep-
resenting the four elements and appropriately arranged on the altar).  
Additionally
include three tall, unlit candles, blue (in the west), green (in the east), and 
white (in
the south), these candles represent the three rays of light.

Altar Decorations: Spring flowers, buds, or any other seasonally appropriate 
decorations.

Begin by performing the full AODA Solitary grove opening (this includes the 
grove open-
ing and the full Sphere of Protection).  After these are complete, begin the 
main ceremony:

Say: “In the world of nature the winter has ended and the Sun has completed half
his long journey toward the north.  The streams are full of water from the 
melting
snow and the spring rains; sap rises in the trees and flowers begin to bloom. 
Birds
return from their winter dwellings far to the south as life wakes from its time 
of sleep.”

Say: “The ancients knew this season as the seedtime of the year, not only for 
the
husbandman and the herdsman but also for those who stand at the gates between
the Seen and the Unseen.  They recognized at this time the power of the thought
held in the mind’s clarity and the word spoken upon the wind’s breath; they 
called
down wisdom from the Sun and called up power from the Earth to illuminate their
minds.”

Say: “The Spring Equinox has arrived, and the Sun and Earth renew the bonds that
unite them. In this time of balanced powers, let me invoke the blessings of all 
the holy
ones upon the grove, the Order, and the Earth. Let us radiate outward a 
blessing to
the living earth!”


Say: “Therefore our work begins from the quarter of Air.”

(Move to the Eastern side of the altar, facing inward.)

Say: “East; west.1   Air; water.  The realm of the Mind; the realm of the 
Heart. May
they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the green candle and pause)

Say: “North; south.  Fire; water.  The realm of the Spirit; The realm of the 
Body.

May they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the white candle and pause).

Say: “The realm of the Winds. The Realm of the Flames. The Realm of the Waves.

The realm of the Stones.  May they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the blue candle and pause).

(Take the cauldron of incense, face eastwards, and hold up the cauldron, as 
though in
offering.)

Say: “By the Hawk of May in the heights of morning, I invoke the air and the 
spirits
of the air!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order and the Earth 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine a blazing star at the zenith, almost infinitely far above the grove; 
this is Fomal-
haut, the Royal Star governing the ceremony. When this image is well 
established, replace
the cauldron of air on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of fire, face southwards and hold up the cauldron, as though 
in offering.)

1           If you are adapting this ceremony for two or more participants for 
this ceremony, instead
have the participants say it this way:

Participant 1: East

Participant 2: West

Participant 1: The realm of the Mind

Participant 2: The realm of the Heart  (And so forth)

Please note that the Druid Grove Manual includes ceremonies for larger groups.


Say: “By the white stag of the summer greenwood, I invoke the fire and the 
spirits
of the fire!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order and the Earth 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine a ray of light descending from the star at infinite height to the 
golden sphere of
the Sun, blazing at zenith above the grove, high above but much closer than the 
star. When
this image is well established, replace the cauldron of fire on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of water, face westwards and hold up the cauldron, as though 
in offering.)

Say: “By the salmon of wisdom who dwells in the sacred pool, I invoke the water
and the spirits of the water!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order 
and the
Earth during the season to come!”

(Imagine the ray of light descending further from the blazing Sun to the sphere 
of the full
Moon standing at zenith above the grove, high above but much closer than the 
Sun. When
this image is well established, replace the cauldron of water on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of earth, face northwards and hold up the cauldron, as 
though in
offering.)

Say: “By the great bear who guards the starry heavens, I invoke the earth and 
the
spirits of the earth!  May their blessings be with us and with all the world 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine the ray of light descending from the shining Moon all the way to the 
Sphere of
Protection you established around the grove. Visualize the Sphere is filled 
with rainbow-colored
light.  One this is well established, visualize the light radiating outward in 
all directions.
Take the time to establish this image firmly.  When this image is well 
established, replace the
cauldron of earth on the altar.

Chant: (Intone with the syllables drawn out Ah-Oh-En:) “AWEN, AWEN, AWEN.”

Say: “In this season of spring may the Sun send forth his rays of blessing; may 
the
Earth receive that blessing and bring forth her abundance. In this sacred time 
of balanced
powers, in this sacred space in the midst of the elements, we invoke the union 
of Sun and
Earth, that the land may be made fruitful and that all who desire the light 
shall find it.”


Meditation

Say: “I(we) will now meditate and reflect upon the turning of the year and the 
gifts
the coming season brings to all.”¹

(A brief period of meditation follows.)

Additional Work

(At this point, it is appropriate to engage in any additional work you would 
like for this
ceremony, including playing music, simply staying in the sacred space for a 
time in quiet,
starting seeds, observing nature, blessing tools, journeying work, etc.  When 
your work is
finished, close out the ceremony using the solitary grove closing.)

1     Alternatively, a specific poem, paragraph, passage, etc. can be read at 
this point as a focus for
the ceremony prior to meditation.


Summer Solstice Ceremony
(Solitary): The Ritual of
Alban Hefin/Heruin

Altar Materials: Usual AODA materials (white altar cloth, four cauldrons rep-
resenting the four elements and appropriately arranged on the altar).  
Additionally
include three tall, unlit candles, blue (in the west), green (in the east), and 
white (in
the south) (these candles represent the three rays of light).

Altar Decorations: Summer herbs, flowers, or other greenery appropriate to the
season.

Begin by performing the full AODA Solitary grove opening (this includes the 
grove
opening and the full Sphere of Protection).  After these are complete, begin 
the main
ceremony:

Say: “In the world of nature, spring’s promise has given way to summer’s 
fulfillment,
and the Sun now stands at his highest point in the sky, preparing for his long 
journey
into darkness. The land is mantled in green as every growing thing bends its 
strength
toward the harvest. Life rejoices in the golden afternoon of the year even as 
it makes
its preparations for the cold months to come.”

Say: “The ancients knew this season as the year’s bright summit, and waited in
their stone circles for the fiery sign of midsummer sunrise, the seal of 
harmony that
unites the turning worlds. They recognized at this time the power of destiny 
born
from the innermost self and the kindling flame of the awakening spirit; they 
turned
their faces to the Sun and set their feet upon the Earth to accomplish the work 
of
their wills.”


Say: “The Summer Solstice has arrived, and the Sun and Earth manifest the polar-
ities of being. In this time of balanced powers, let us invoke the blessings of 
all the
holy ones upon the grove, the order and the Earth.  Let us radiate outward a 
blessing
to the living earth!”

Say: “Therefore, our work begins in the quarter of fire.”

(Move to the Southern side of the altar, facing inward.)

Say: “South; north. Fire; earth. The realm of the Spirit; the realm of the 
Body. May
they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the green candle and pause)

Say: “East; West. Air; Water. The realm of the Mind; The realm of the Heart. May
they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the white candle and pause).

Say: “The Realm of the Flames. The Realm of the Waves. The realm of the Stones.

The realm of the Winds. May they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the blue candle and pause).

(Take the cauldron of incense, face eastwards, and holds up the cauldron, as 
though in
offering.)

Say: “By the Hawk of May in the heights of morning, I invoke the air and the 
spirits
of the air!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order and the Earth 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine a blazing star at the zenith, almost infinitely far above the grove; 
this is Fomal-
haut, the Royal Star governing the ceremony. When this image is well 
established, replace
the cauldron of air on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of fire, face southwards and hold up the cauldron, as though 
in offering.)


Say: “By the white stag of the summer greenwood, I invoke the fire and the 
spirits
of the fire!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order and the Earth 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine a ray of light descending from the star at infinite height to the 
golden sphere of
the Sun, blazing at zenith above the grove, high above but much closer than the 
star. When
this image is well established, replace the cauldron of fire on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of water, face westwards and hold up the cauldron, as though 
in offering.)

Say: “By the salmon of wisdom who dwells in the sacred pool, I invoke the water
and the spirits of the water!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order 
and the
Earth during the season to come!”

(Imagine the ray of light descending further from the blazing Sun to the sphere 
of the full
Moon standing at zenith above the grove, high above but much closer than the 
Sun. When
this image is well established, replace the cauldron of water on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of earth, face northwards and hold up the cauldron, as 
though in
offering.)

Say: “By the great bear who guards the starry heavens, I invoke the earth and 
the
spirits of the earth!  May their blessings be with us and with all the world 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine the ray of light descending from the shining Moon all the way to the 
Sphere of
Protection you established around the grove. Visualize the Sphere is filled 
with rainbow-colored
light.  Once this is well established, visualize the light radiating outward in 
all directions.
Take the time to establish this image firmly.  When this image is well 
established, replace the
cauldron of earth on the altar.

Chant: (Intone with the syllables drawn out Ah-Oh-En:) “AWEN, AWEN, AWEN.”

Say: “In this season of summer may the Sun make manifest the mystery of Light.
May the Earth reflect that manifestation in the mystery of Life. In this sacred 
time
of balanced powers, in this sacred space in the midst of the elements, we 
invoke the


Sun in his glory, the Earth in her richness, and the harmony that unites them, 
that
the unity of all being may be made manifest. Let us meditate on the turning of 
the
year and the gifts the coming season brings to all.”

Meditation

Say: “I(we) will now meditate and reflect upon the turning of the year and the 
gifts
the coming season brings to all.”1

(A brief period of meditation follows.)

Additional Work

(At this point, it is appropriate to engage in any additional work you would 
like for this
ceremony, including playing music, sitting in the sun for a time and having its 
rays warm
you, writing in your druid journal, blessing tools, journeying work, etc.  When 
your work is
finished, close out the ceremony using the solitary grove closing.)

1          Alternatively, a specific poem, paragraph, passage, etc. can be read 
at this point as a focus
for the ceremony prior to meditation.


Autumn Equinox Ceremony
(Solitary): The Ritual of
Alban Elfed/Elued

Altar Materials: Usual AODA materials (white altar cloth, four cauldrons rep-
resenting the four elements and appropriately arranged on the altar).  
Additionally
include three tall, unlit candles, blue (in the west), green (in the east), and 
white (in
the south) (these candles represent the three rays of light).

Altar Decorations: Fall leaves, nuts, squash, corn, and any other fruits of the 
fall
season.

Begin by performing the full AODA Solitary grove opening (this includes the 
grove open-
ing and the full Sphere of Protection).  After these are complete, begin the 
main ceremony:

Say: “In the world of nature summer has given way and the Sun has descended
from the heights of heaven into the south. The leaves of the trees blaze with 
orange
and red as the fields turn harvest gold. The cries of the geese sound overhead 
as they
begin their long journey toward their winter homes. Squirrels leap from branch 
to
branch as they prepare for the long cold months to come; the sound of clashing
antlers rings through the woods as stags test their strength before the 
watchful eyes
of does.”

Say: “The ancients knew this season as the harvest time of the year, not only 
for
those who gathered in the sheaves and led the cattle down from summer pastures
but also for the wise whose harvest is the lore of past ages and the whispers 
of the
Unseen. They recognized at this time the power of the desire cherished in the 
heart’s
silence and the bonds that reach from person to person like the sea uniting 
shore with


shore; they called down power from the Sun and called up wisdom from the Earth
to illuminate their hearts.”

Say: “The Autumn Equinox has arrived, and the Sun and Earth renew the bonds
that unite them. In this time of balanced powers, let us invoke the blessings 
of all the
holy ones upon the grove, the Order, and the Earth. Let us radiate outward a 
blessing
to the living earth!”

Say, “Therefore, our work begins in the quarter of Water.”

(Move to the Western side of the altar, facing inward.)

Say: “West; East. Water; Air. The realm of the Heart; the realm of the Mind. May
they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the green candle and pause)

Say: “North; South. The realm of the Body; The realm of the Spirit. May they 
enter
into the great harmony.”

(Light the white candle and pause).

Say: “The Realm of the Waves.  The realm of the Stones.  The realm of the 
Winds.

The Realm of the Flames. May they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the blue candle and pause).

(Take the cauldron of incense, face eastwards, and hold up the cauldron, as 
though in
offering.)

Say: “By the Hawk of May in the heights of morning, I invoke the air and the 
spirits
of the air!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order and the Earth 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine a blazing star at the zenith, almost infinitely far above the grove; 
this is Fomal-
haut, the Royal Star governing the ceremony. When this image is well 
established, replace
the cauldron of air on the altar.)


of balanced powers, in this sacred space in the midst of the elements, we 
invoke the
union of Sun and Earth, that the land may be made fruitful and that all who 
desire
the light shall find it.”

Meditation

Say: “I(we) will now meditate and reflect upon the turning of the year and the 
gifts
the coming season brings to all.” 1

(A brief period of meditation follows.)

Additional Work

(At this point, it is appropriate to engage in any additional work you would 
like for this
ceremony, including enjoying a ritual harvest meal (previously prepared), 
observing nature,
playing music, sitting and watching the sunset, engaging in other bardic arts, 
journeying
work, taking time to write in your druid journal, etc. When your work is 
finished, close out
the ceremony using the solitary grove closing.)

1     Alternatively, a specific poem, paragraph, passage, etc. can be read at 
this point as a focus for
the ceremony prior to meditation.


Winter Solstice Ceremony
(Solitary): The Ritual of
Alban Arthan/Arthur

Altar Materials: Usual AODA materials (white altar cloth, four cauldrons rep-
resenting the four elements and appropriately arranged on the altar).  
Additionally
include three tall, unlit candles, blue (in the west), green (in the east), and 
white (in
the south) (these candles represent the three rays of light).

Altar Decorations: Conifer branches, pine cones, wintergreen, holly, mistletoe, 
oak
leaves (or other decorations befitting of the season)

Begin by performing the full AODA Solitary grove opening (this includes the 
grove open-
ing and the full Sphere of Protection).  After these are complete, begin the 
main ceremony:

Say: “In the world of nature the harvest is over and the Sun has descended to 
the
place of his death and rebirth. Cold blows the wind, and colder still lie the 
snow and
the bare earth and the bare black branches of the trees beneath the bright 
stars; ice rims
the edges of the streams and breath bursts white from the lips. Only those 
creatures
that cannot sleep the winter away experience the silence and quietude of the 
winter
days and wait for the coming of spring.”

Say: “The ancients knew this season as the end and beginning of the year, and 
waited
in their stone circles for the first light of the newborn sun, the promise of 
the new year
yet to come.  They recognized at this time the power of patience and the wisdom 
of
the world beneath the turning stars, the lessons woven by countless seasons 
into bone
and sinew and sense; they gazed with renewed wonder on the pale Sun and the cold
Earth as they awaited the common destiny of all material things.”


Say: “The Winter Solstice has arrived, and the Sun and Earth manifest the 
polarities
of being. In this time of balanced powers, let us invoke the blessings of all 
the holy
ones upon the grove, the Order, and the Earth.  Let us give blessing to all of 
the land!”

Say: “Therefore, our work begins in the quarter of Earth.”

(Move to the Western side of the altar, facing inward.)

Say: “North, South, Earth, Fire. The realm of the Body; the realm of the 
Spirit. May
they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the green candle and pause)

Say: “West; East. Water; Air. The realm of the Heart; The realm of the Mind. May
they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the white candle and pause).

Say: “The realm of the Stones.  The realm of the Winds. The Realm of the 
Flames.

The Realm of the Waves. May they enter into the great harmony.”

(Light the blue candle and pause).

(Take the cauldron of incense, face eastwards, and hold up the cauldron, as 
though in
offering.)

Say: “By the Hawk of May in the heights of morning, I invoke the air and the 
spirits
of the air!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order and the Earth 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine a blazing star at the zenith, almost infinitely far above the grove; 
this is Fomal-
haut, the Royal Star governing the ceremony. When this image is well 
established, replace
the cauldron of air on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of fire, face southwards and hold up the cauldron, as though 
in offering.)


Say: “By the white stag of the summer greenwood, I invoke the fire and the 
spirits
of the fire!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order and the Earth 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine a ray of light descending from the star at infinite height to the 
golden sphere of
the Sun, blazing at zenith above the grove, high above but much closer than the 
star. When
this image is well established, replace the cauldron of fire on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of water, face westwards and hold up the cauldron, as though 
in offering.)

Say: “By the salmon of wisdom who dwells in the sacred pool, I invoke the water
and the spirits of the water!  May their blessings be with the grove, the order 
and the
Earth during the season to come!”

(Imagine the ray of light descending further from the blazing Sun to the sphere 
of the full
Moon standing at zenith above the grove, high above but much closer than the 
Sun. When
this image is well established, replace the cauldron of water on the altar.)

(Take the cauldron of earth, face northwards and hold up the cauldron, as 
though in
offering.)

Say: “By the great bear who guards the starry heavens, I invoke the earth and 
the
spirits of the earth!  May their blessings be with us and with all the world 
during the
season to come!”

(Imagine the ray of light descending from the shining Moon all the way to the 
Sphere of
Protection you established around the grove. Visualize the Sphere is filled 
with rainbow-colored
light.  One this is well established, visualize the light radiating outward in 
all directions.
Take the time to establish this image firmly.  When this image is well 
established, replace the
cauldron of earth on the altar.

Chant: (Intone with the syllables drawn out Ah-Oh-En:) “AWEN, AWEN, AWEN.”

Say: “In this season of (summer/winter) may the Sun make manifest the mystery of
Light. May the Earth reflect that manifestation in the mystery of Life. In this 
sacred
time of balanced powers, in this sacred space in the midst of the elements, we 
invoke


the Sun in his glory, the Earth in her richness, and the harmony that unites 
them,
that the unity of all being may be made manifest. Let us meditate on the 
turning of
the year and the gifts the coming season brings to all.”

Meditation

Say: “I(we) will now meditate and reflect upon the turning of the year and the 
gifts
the coming season brings to all 1.

(A brief period of meditation follows.)

Additional Work

(At this point, it is appropriate to engage in any additional work you would 
like for this
ceremony, including sitting in a candlelit room, watching a fire, playing 
music, staying in
the sacred space for a time in quietude and reflection, writing in your druid 
journal, blessing
tools, journeying work, etc.  When your work is finished, close out the 
ceremony using the
solitary grove closing.)

1    Alternatively, a specific poem, paragraph, passage, etc. can be read at 
this point as a focus for
the ceremony prior to meditation.


Appendix D: Tree Planting
Ritual (Solo/Group)

By Dana O’Driscoll, Archdruid of Water1

This simple planting ritual can be used to bless a single tree or a whole grove 
of trees2.
If you’ve already planted your trees but still want to bless them, you can 
still use the bulk
of the ritual below—just sprinkle the ash near the tree’s roots (for fire) and 
put some
high quality soil, compost, or composted manure for the “earth” part around the 
trunk.

Ritual Supplies

The following supplies are needed for this ritual:

—   A feather, fan, or incense (representing air)

—   A small bowl of hardwood ash or charcoal (non-chemically treated) (repre-
senting fire)

—   A watering can filled with water (it can be special water from a local 
spring,
etc.) (representing water).

1     This ritual was originally developed by Dana O’Driscoll, Archdruid of 
Water, for Star and
Thorn Grove, AODA, to plant a new grove of trees in our sacred outdoor grove. 
It has been adapt-
ed for the New Candidate Guide. Please feel free to adapt it for your purposes.

2     If you are performing this ritual by yourself, you can perform this 
ritual as written. This ritual
can adapted to a group for planting a whole grove of trees or a single tree.  
Begin by having the
group dig all of the holes for the trees (the hardest part). Assign members of 
the group to the four
elements and have the group work around the grove of trees. Each elemental 
group can make
their      way around the circle of the trees in a clockwise manner. When this 
work is done, one or

three people can perform spirit above, below, and within. If you have an uneven 
number of people,
assign more planters than the other parts.


—   A small bowl of compost (representing earth)

—   A shovel

—   The tree you wish to plant

Ritual Preparation

Dig the hole for your tree prior to planting. The hole for your tree should be 
substan-
tially deeper and wider than the tree’s roots. See these instructions for more 
information:
https://www.arborday.org/trees/planting/containerized.cfm. Place your tree next 
to
the hole you have prepared before the ritual begins. Do not take the tree out 
of the
pot or bag it is in until just before you plant it; exposing the roots of the 
tree to air
too long can damage them.

Place your ritual supplies on the ground or on a small altar near the tree.

The Ritual

Open the space with the AODA’s Solitary Grove opening or Group Grove Opening 
(see

AODA Grove Manual for the Group Opening).

Say: “Trees are a vital part of all life on this planet—nourishing the soil and 
pre-
venting erosion, creating oxygen, absorbing carbon dioxide, providing habitat 
and food,
and creating shade.  It is not hard to see why the ancient druids celebrated in 
groves
of trees. With each tree we plant and tend as it grows, we provide a blessing 
to the
land and all its inhabitants. I welcome this tree to this land!”

(Place a pinch of ash into the hole prior to the tree planting.)

Say: “May this tree be nourished by this sacred ash, by the energy of the sun, 
the
white stag in the summer greenwood, and the powers of the south. We thank this 
tree
for the shade she will provide from the summer sun.”

(Place each tree in the hole, filling the hole with earth.)

As you are planting the tree, say: “May this tree be blessed by the tall stones 
and
great bear of the starry heavens and the powers of the north.  We thank this 
tree for
the bounty and stability she will provide.”


(Water the tree thoroughly.)

As you are watering, say: “May this tree be blessed by the salmon of wisdom 
sacred
pool and the powers of the west. We thank this tree for the wisdom she will 
provide. ”

(Lightly fan each tree with a feather/fan/or circle it with incense.)

As you do so, say: “May this tree be blessed by the powers of the hawk of May
soaring in the heights of the morning and the power of the air. We thank and 
honor
her for the oxygen that she will provide.”

(Trace your finger on the ground around the tree in a circle and point 
downward.  Visu-
alize a ray of the telluric current, green/gold light, coming up from the earth 
and filling the
tree’s roots and trunk with light.)

Say: “May the telluric current rise and bless this tree with the spark of 
nywfre.”

(Trace your finger in the air above the tree in a circle and point upward.  
Visualize a
ray of the solar current, coming directly from the sun in a golden light, down 
to the tree and
filling its upper branches and trunk with light.)

Say: “May the solar current descend and bless this tree with the blessing and 
light
of the sun.”

(Visualize a white glow from where the two currents meet, surrounding the 
tree.)

Chant: “Awen, Awen, Awen.”

Say: “May the lunar current be invoked as a blessing for this tree. I welcome 
you to
the fellowship of these lands. In this sacred earth will you grow strong.  In 
the warm
rains, will you be nourished.  In the wind in the air, will your leaves speak 
to us as we
listen. In fire of the sun, will you grow and shelter me. You embody the core 
value of
peace—for though you are strong, you harm none. And though you are mighty, you
protect   all beneath your branches. As the earth and moon turn, may you grow 
and thrive.”

Spend a few minutes in quiet meditation with the tree. Then close the ceremony 
in the
usual way (grove closing).



