Title:Journal the journey: formalize the feedback loop by keeping a journal of what you do every day. Acknowledge what you did, how things are going, and where you plan to focus your attention next
Author(s):Jason Womack
Source:Training. 49.4 (July-August 2012): p14. From General OneFile.
Document Type:Article
Full Text: COPYRIGHT 2012 Lakewood Media Group, LLC
http://www.trainingmag.com/content/about-us
Full Text: 
We love to read about life. We talk about what happened, who's doing what, and where people are going.

For the next five weeks, follow your own story. Make a point to acknowledge what you did, how things are going, and where you plan to focus your attention next. As they say, it's not only reaching the destination, but the journey you can learn from, as well. Journaling the journey is one way to look at your best efforts, and make them even better.

At the end of every day, I write about 100 words in a small journal I keep on the nightstand. There are three time zones I journal the journey in: the past, the present, and the future.

When I capture what happened, I look at: where I was, who I was with, even what I was thinking. I look for and recognize surprises, good things, or when I was discouraged. Finally, I spin out of the past with the question, "If I were in that circumstance again, what might I do differently?

Next, there's the present. I capture the thoughts, feelings, worries, or plans that are "right there" calling for my attention. Am I tired? Enthusiastic? Am I feeling hopeful? Or am I overwhelmed or stressed?

And, of course, there's the future. What's coming my way? What is six or 12 or even 18 months out that, as I let the words land on the page, I can begin to picture it, feel it, or hear it coming true?

Over time, I've collected a short checklist of questions I can use to trigger my thinking, and journal the journey. Here are just a few of the ones I use, day to day:

What have I learned today? I know that every day I will be given an opportunity to identify something new. At the end of the day, I will note anything I saw or heard for the first time and indicate why I think it's noteworthy.

What opportunity did I create? I ask myself who I met, where I went, and what I saw that may have a future opportunity. I'm not making a to-do list; I'm practicing thinking bigger.

What questions were answered? Did a project ship? Did a contract get signed? Did a mystery get solved? Here is an opportunity to "close the day." I have found there is something about acknowledging completion that is positive and relaxing. It is a way to mentally "check things off."

What question came up? Yes, I keep it to one question, and while I'm writing, I avoid answering it. Instead, I further clarify the WHAT behind the question. Occasionally, the question will transform itself while I'm writing.

OBJECTIVE VS, SUBJECTIVE

I always remind my clients of the subjective/ objective nature of this journaling process. Objectively speaking, it is important to keep some kind of record you can look back on and review. This is a significant part of the self-leadership and mastery process. Subjectively speaking, it is a roller-coaster ride. You'll see the ups and downs, the days when you were "on" and the ones when you got beat up. When you go back and see these highs and lows, you'll do so with the gift of hindsight. What seemed like a big deal (or what seemed like just a little something) may wind up being different now than what you initially imagined.

There's also going to be a natural cycle of review for you. Whether it is monthly, quarterly, or annually, there are benefits to seeing what you've captured over time:

* You'll see where you were.

* You'll build toward where you're going. I!

To read the full-length article, visit http.//trainingmag.com/content/how-journal-journey.

BY JASON WOMACK, MED, MA

Jason Womack, MEd, MA, is the founder and CEO of The Jason Womack Company, which helps individual contributors, entrepreneurs, and executives work effectively and efficiently so they have the time, energy, and focus to achieve more in work and in life. He is also the author of "Your Best Just Got Better." For more information, visit www.womackcompany.com and www.twitter. com/jasonwomack or e-mail Jason@ WomackCompany.com.

Womack, Jason

Source Citation   (MLA 7th Edition)
Womack, Jason. "Journal the journey: formalize the feedback loop by keeping a journal of what you do every day. Acknowledge what you did, how things are going, and where you plan to focus your attention next." Training July-Aug. 2012: 14. General OneFile. Web. 29 Jan. 2013.
Document URL
http://go.galegroup.com/ps/i.do?id=GALE%7CA298613983&v=2.1&u=massn&it=r&p=GPS&sw=w

Gale Document Number: GALE|A298613983